B74S, en-route, Anchorage AK USA, 2004











  B74S, en-route, Anchorage AK USA, 2004









Summary

On 5 December 2004 a Boeing 747-100SP experienced a rapid depressurisation and subsequent minor damage after reaching cruise level near Anchorage, Alaska. The crew elected to return to Ted Stevens International Airport, Anchorage where the aircraft landed without further incident.




Event Details

When

05/12/2004



Event Type


AW




Day/Night

Not Recorded



Flight Conditions

Not Recorded







Flight Details

Aircraft


 

BOEING 747SP









Operator

Nippon Cargo Airlines



Type of Flight

Public Transport (Cargo)



Flight Origin




Anchorage







Intended Destination




Tokyo Narita Airport







Actual Destination




Anchorage







Take-off Commenced

Yes



Flight Airborne

Yes



Flight Completed

Yes



Phase of Flight

Cruise








Location

Approx.

137 miles west of Anchorage, Alaska










General

Tag(s)


              Inadequate Airworthiness Procedures
          




AW

System(s)


              Airframe
          



Contributor(s)


              Damage Tolerance,
              Component Fault in service
          




Outcome

Damage or injury

Yes



Aircraft damage

Major



Non-aircraft damage

Yes



Non-occupant Casualties

No



Occupant Injuries

None



Occupant Fatalities

None



Off Airport Landing

Yes



Ditching

Yes




Causal Factor Group(s)

Group(s)

Aircraft Technical




Safety Recommendation(s)

Group(s)

None Made




Investigation Type

Type

Independent









Description
On 5 December 2004 a Boeing 747-100SP experienced a rapid depressurisation and subsequent minor damage after reaching cruise level near Anchorage, Alaska. The crew elected to return to Ted Stevens International Airport, Anchorage where the aircraft landed without further incident.
The Investigation
The investigation of the Serious Incident was led by the National Transportation Safety Board (USA) (NTSB) which stated in the official Report:
"An examination revealed an elliptical tear in the right side of the pressure bulkhead web separating the electronics service bay from the nose wheel well. The tear extended about 12-inches along a horizontal rivet line, with both ends of the torn skin turned downward approximately 80-90 degrees. The damaged area (STA 260-280, WL 160-170) was excised from the structure, and an examination of the fracture mechanism was conducted. The fracture examination disclosed that the web fracture was initiated by fatigue from multiple origins on the outboard web surface within the pressure vessel. Ten separate fatigue cracks propagated through the full web thickness before the onset of rapid ductile tearing. Each fatigue crack formed adjacent to a fastener hole common with the WL 170 beam, and was in line with the edge of the bonded strip doublers on the inboard surface (wheel well side). The web material met all the engineering specifications. At the time of the incident, the airplane had logged 58,185 flight hours, and 27,243 cycles/landings. Inspection criteria for the affected area are contained in a manufacturer's Service Bulletin and their Alert Revisions 1 thru 4."
Probable Cause(s) and Recommendations
The NTSB determines the probable cause of this incident as follows:

"The fatigue and subsequent fracture of a portion of the airplane's pressure bulkhead, which resulted in a rapid decompression during cruise flight."

Following the examination of the incident airplane, Alert Revision 4 was amended to specify more frequent inspections of the affected area.

"Alert Revision 4 adds the requirement for repeated inspections of areas 1 and 2, at 500 flight-cycle intervals once the airplane has reached 20,000 flight cycles. It also decreased the inspection intervals of area 3 from 6,000 flight-cycles to 1,500 flight-cycles."

Related Articles

Ageing Aircraft - Structural Failure
Airworthiness - The System
Defect Assessment
Damage Tolerance
Cooperative Development of Operational Safety and Continuing Airworthiness Programme

Further Reading

NTSB Report ANC05IA016