A319, en-route, Nantes France, 2006











  A319, en-route, Nantes France, 2006









Summary

On 15 September 2006, an Easyjet Airbus A319, despatched under MEL provision with one engine generator inoperative and the corresponding electrical power supplied by the Auxiliary Power Unit generator, suffered a further en route electrical failure which included power loss to all COM radio equipment which could not then be re-instated. The flight was completed as flight planned using the remaining flight instruments with the one remaining transponder selected to the standard emergency code. The incident began near Nantes, France.




Event Details

When

15/09/2006



Event Type


AGC,
              AW




Day/Night

Day



Flight Conditions

VMC







Flight Details

Aircraft


 

AIRBUS A-319









Operator

EasyJet



Type of Flight

Public Transport (Passenger)



Flight Origin




Alicante-Elche Airport







Intended Destination




Bristol International Airport







Take-off Commenced

Yes



Flight Airborne

Yes



Flight Completed

Yes



Phase of Flight

Cruise








Location








General

Tag(s)


              Inadequate Airworthiness Procedures
          




AGC

Tag(s)


              Loss of Comms
          




AW

System(s)


              Communications,
              Electrical Power
          



Contributor(s)


              OEM Design fault,
              Contributing ADD,
              Component Fault in service
          




Outcome

Damage or injury

No



Non-aircraft damage

No



Non-occupant Casualties

No



Off Airport Landing

No



Ditching

No




Causal Factor Group(s)

Group(s)

Aircraft Technical




Safety Recommendation(s)

Group(s)

Aircraft Airworthiness
Air Traffic Management




Investigation Type

Type

Independent









Description
On 15 September 2006, an Easyjet Airbus AIRBUS A-319, despatched under Minimum Equipment List (MEL) provision with one engine generator inoperative and the corresponding electrical power supplied by the APU generator, suffered a further en route electrical failure which included power loss to all COM radio equipment which could not then be re-instated. The flight was completed as flight planned using the remaining flight instruments with the one remaining transponder selected to the standard emergency code. The incident began near Nantes, France.
Synopsis
The following is the Synopsis from the UK AAIB report:
"The aircraft was dispatched under the provisions of the operator’s Minimum Equipment List with the Auxiliary Power Unit (APU) generator on line, substituting for the No 1 main generator which had been selected off after a fault on the previous flight had caused it to trip off line. During the cruise, the APU generator disconnected from the system, probably because of a recurrence of the original fault. This caused the loss of a substantial number of aircraft services, including some flight instruments and all means of radio telephony (RTF) communication. Manual reconfiguration of the electrical system should have recovered many of the services but the flight crew was not able to achieve this. Since they were without RTF communications, the crew considered that the best option was to select the emergency transponder code and continue the flight in accordance with the flight plan."
Related Articles

Loss of Communication
Air-Ground Communication
Airworthiness

Further Reading

For further information, see the Final AAIB Report 4/2009 and the AAIB Special Bulletin: S9/2006