AS3B, en-route, northern North Sea UK, 2008











  AS3B, en-route, northern North Sea UK, 2008









Summary

On 22 February 2008, a Eurocopter AS332 L2 Super Puma flying from an offshore oil platform to Aberdeen was struck by lightning. There was no apparent consequence and so, although this event required a landing as soon as possible, the commander decided to continue the remaining 165nm to the planned destination which was achieved uneventfully. Main rotor blade damage including some beyond repairable limits was subsequently discovered. The Investigation noted evidence indicating that this helicopter type had a relatively high propensity to sustain lightning strikes but noted that, despite the risk of damage, there was currently no adverse safety trend.




Event Details

When

22/02/2008



Event Type


AW,
              HF,
              LOC,
              WX




Day/Night

Day



Flight Conditions

IMC







Flight Details

Aircraft


 

AEROSPATIALE AS-332L2 Super Puma Mk2









Operator

Not Recorded



Type of Flight

Public Transport (Non Revenue)



Intended Destination




Aberdeen Dyce Airport







Take-off Commenced

Yes



Flight Airborne

Yes



Flight Completed

Yes



Phase of Flight

Cruise








Location

Approx.

North Sea,165 nm north-east of Aberdeen










HF

Tag(s)


              Procedural non compliance
          




LOC

Tag(s)


              Environmental Factors
          




WX

Tag(s)


              Lightning Damage
          




AW

System(s)


              Rotors
          




Outcome

Damage or injury

Yes



Aircraft damage

Major



Non-aircraft damage

Yes



Non-occupant Casualties

No



Off Airport Landing

Yes



Ditching

Yes




Causal Factor Group(s)

Group(s)

Aircraft Operation




Safety Recommendation(s)

Group(s)

None Made




Investigation Type

Type

Independent









Description
On 22 February 2008, a Eurocopter AS332 L2 Super Puma being operated on a day passenger flight from the Bruce Offshore Oil Platform to Aberdeen was transiting a squall line in Instrument Meteorological Conditions (IMC) at the cruise altitude of 2000 feet when it was struck by lightning. There was no loss of systems or indication of any other adverse effect and the flight was completed as planned with no subsequent consequences for the operation of the helicopter or its 17 occupants. Significant main rotor blade damage was found during post flight inspection.
Investigation
An Investigation was carried out by the UK AAIB. It was established that the aircraft had encountered a line of rain showers across the intended track and had selected a crossing point which had appeared to offer the shortest transit and avoided weather radar red returns. Soon after beginning the transit, both pilots saw “a bright flash at the rotor tip in the one o’clock position, accompanied by a ‘bang’ or ‘pop’ sound”.
Although there were no obvious consequences, it was initially decided to begin a diversion towards the nearest available platform which did not involve returning through the line of showers, in accordance with the Quick Reference Handbook (QRH) requirement to land as soon as possible after a lightning strike but it was then established that adverse and unsuitable weather conditions prevailed at this and all other platforms in the vicinity and that diversion to either Sumburgh or Kirkwall would involve further transit through adverse weather. The crew therefore elected to continue to Aberdeen as originally planned.
A post flight inspection found main rotor blade damage including arcing damage to the leading edge anti-erosion strips, broken bonding leads and damaged trim tabs with high energy tracking visible on two main rotor pitch link ball joints and one main rotor servo upper ball joint. The main rotor head and other components were removed and returned to the manufacturer for detailed investigation where it was found that one rotor blade was damaged beyond repair limits and the other three were repairable.
It was found that although air-ground lightning strikes (normally regarded as the most damaging type) had been recorded in the general area around the time of the strike to the helicopter, none of these had been anywhere near the position of the helicopter. It was concluded that the strike had probably been either an inter-cloud or intra-cloud discharge which are known to frequently be triggered by the presence of an aircraft. The fact that “a very large number of lightning strikes have been encountered by AS332-series helicopters operating over the northern North Sea, since the type’s entry into service” was noted as was the fact that these “appear to have occurred predominantly during the winter months”. The response to this in the form of numerous design changes and modifications to the type was also noted as was the apparently positive effect on type vulnerability.
The Final Report of the Investigation was published in September 2008.
Further Reading

Helicopter-triggered Lightning Strikes
Health and Usage Monitoring System (HUMS)
Offshore Helicopter Safety Review 2014 UK CAA
Engine Malfunction Trigered by a Lightning Strikes, UK CAA AIC 29/2004 (Pink 64), April 29 2004