B703, Sydney Australia, 1969











  B703, Sydney Australia, 1969









Summary

On 1 December 1969, a Boeing 707-320 being operated by Pan Am and making a daylight take off from Sydney, Australia ran into a flock of gulls just after V1 and prior to rotation and after a compressor stall and observed partial loss of thrust on engine 2 (only), the aircraft commander elected to reject the take off. Despite rapid action to initiate maximum braking and the achievement of full reverse thrust on all engines including No 2, this resulted in an overrun of the end of the runway by 170m and substantial aircraft damage. A full emergency evacuation was carried out with no injuries to any of the occupants. There was no fire.




Event Details

When

01/12/1969



Event Type


BS,
              HF,
              RE




Day/Night

Day



Flight Conditions

On Ground - Normal Visibility







Flight Details

Aircraft


 

BOEING 707-300









Operator

Pan Am



Type of Flight

Public Transport (Passenger)



Flight Origin




Sydney Airport







Intended Destination




Honolulu International Airport







Take-off Commenced

Yes



Flight Airborne

No



Flight Completed

No



Phase of Flight

Take Off








Location








Location - Airport

Airport

YSSY




General

Tag(s)


              Extra flight crew (no training)
          




BS

Tag(s)


              Flocking Birds,
              Engine damage,
              Coastal or Large Inland Water Location,
              Engine Ingestion
          




HF

Tag(s)


              Procedural non compliance
          




RE

Tag(s)


              Overrun on Take Off,
              RTO decision after V1
          




EPR

Tag(s)


              Emergency Evacuation
          




Outcome

Damage or injury

Yes



Aircraft damage

Major



Non-aircraft damage

Yes



Non-occupant Casualties

No



Off Airport Landing

Yes



Ditching

Yes




Causal Factor Group(s)

Group(s)

Aircraft Operation




Safety Recommendation(s)

Group(s)

Aircraft Operation




Investigation Type

Type

Independent









Description
On 1 December 1969, a Boeing 707-320 being operated by Pan Am and making a daylight take off from Sydney, Australia ran into a flock of gulls just after V1 and prior to rotation and after a compressor stall and observed partial loss of thrust on engine 2 (only), the aircraft commander elected to reject the take off. Despite rapid action to initiate maximum braking and the achievement of full reverse thrust on all engines including No 2, this resulted in an overrun of the end of the runway by 170m and substantial aircraft damage. A full emergency evacuation was carried out with no injuries to any of the occupants. There was no fire.
The Offical Investigation Report was published in August 1970 and concluded that, despite the decision to reject the take off being made after V1, the subsequent overrun was "not inevitable". The conclusion of probable cause was that "in the circumstances of an abandoned take-off, the aircraft could not be brought to a stop within the nominally adequate runway length because of an error in the calculation of load, a reduction in wind velocity from that forecast and the use of rolling start and braking techniques which would not ensure most effective use of the available runway length."
Related Articles

Bird Strike
Runway Excursion

Further Reading

For further information, see the full Australian Air Safety Investigation Branch Report into the accident.