B732, Seattle WA USA, 2006











  B732, Seattle WA USA, 2006









Summary

On 30 October 2006, at Seattle-Tacoma International Airport, Seattle, Washington a Boeing 737-200 operated by Alaska Airlines, took off in daylight from a runway parallel to that which had been cleared with no actual adverse consequences.




Event Details

When

30/10/2006



Event Type


HF,
              RI




Day/Night

Day



Flight Conditions

On Ground - Normal Visibility







Flight Details

Aircraft


 

BOEING 737-200









Operator

Alaska Airlines



Type of Flight

Public Transport (Passenger)



Flight Origin




Seattle-Tacoma







Intended Destination




Juneau







Take-off Commenced

Yes



Flight Airborne

Yes



Flight Completed

Yes



Phase of Flight

Take Off








Location








Location - Airport

Airport

KSEA




HF

Tag(s)


              Distraction,
              Ineffective Monitoring,
              Spatial Disorientation
          




Outcome

Damage or injury

Yes



Non-aircraft damage

Yes



Non-occupant Casualties

No



Off Airport Landing

Yes



Ditching

Yes




Causal Factor Group(s)

Group(s)

Aircraft Operation




Safety Recommendation(s)

Group(s)

None Made




Investigation Type

Type

Independent









Description
On 30 October 2006, at Seattle-Tacoma International Airport, Seattle, Washington a Boeing 737-200 operated by Alaska Airlines, took off in daylight from a runway parallel to that which had been cleared with no actual adverse consequences.
Synopsis
The official National Transportation Safety Board (USA) (NTSB) Report on the Serious Incident states:
"According to the captain of the flight, there was a short delay at the gate because of "a cargo issue." As a result, the flight crew had to correct the flight paperwork and obtain an amended release from dispatch. While at the gate, the first officer (FO) of the flight obtained the automatic terminal information service (ATIS) information "Golf" and received the flight's air traffic control clearance via the aircraft communications addressing and reporting system. ATIS "Golf" indicated that both full-length and taxiway Q intersection takeoff operations were being conducted from runway 34R.
According to the flight crewmembers, during the delay at the gate, they performed a taxi briefing, which included a departure briefing from for runway 34R. After pushback from the gate, the ground controller instructed the flight to follow another airplane to runway 34R at taxiway Q.
The captain stated that he was taxiing slowly to allow time for dispatch to send the amended release. During the "short taxi," the captain handled the radios, and the FO worked with dispatch to complete the flight paperwork. As the flight approached taxiway Q, the FO received the amended release. The captain then switched over to the tower frequency and heard the local controller (LC) instruct the flight to taxi the airplane into position and hold on runway 34C. The captain stated that, even though he read back "34 center" to the controller, he was still thinking that the airplane would be taking off from runway 34R. During this time, the FO was completing the preflight activities.
The LC then issued the flight takeoff clearance from runway 34C and indicated that there was traffic on short final. The captain stated that he "was sure the tower controller said runway 34C" and "read back what he heard" but that he "was thinking runway 34R." As the airplane taxied onto the centerline, the captain conducted a compass check and then transferred control of the airplane to the FO. The airplane departed uneventfully from runway 34R. The flight crew stated that the first indication that the airplane had departed from the wrong runway was when the controller informed them after takeoff.
The Investigation
The NTSB determines the probable cause(s) of this incident as follows:

the flight crew's failure to cross-check and verify that the airplane was on the correct runway before takeoff. Contributing to the incident was the flight crew's self-induced pressure to heed the takeoff clearance during a period of increased workload.

No Safety Recommendations are made in the Report.
Related Articles
Runway Excursion

Runway Excursion
Wrong Runway Use

Human Factors

ATC Expectation Bias
Situational Awareness

Further Reading

The NTSB Report (DCA07IA008)