DH8C / Vehicle, Tamworth SE Australia, 2008











  DH8C / Vehicle, Tamworth SE Australia, 2008









Summary

On 7 February 2008, an ATC TWR at Tamworth cleared an Eastern Australia Bombardier DHC8-300 for take off having already cleared a bird scaring vehicle onto the same runway. The vehicle was still on the runway at the time of the take off clearance and as the flight crew could see the vehicle, they did not commence take off. The vehicle driver reported having been monitoring the TWR frequency and vacated the runway. The subsequent Investigation noted a record of good competency assessments for the controller involved and found no specific explanation for his lapse.




Event Details

When

07/02/2008



Event Type


HF,
              RI




Day/Night

Day



Flight Conditions

On Ground - Normal Visibility







Flight Details

Aircraft


 

BOMBARDIER Dash 8 Q300









Operator

Eastern Australia Airlines



Type of Flight

Public Transport (Passenger)



Flight Origin




Tamworth Airport







Intended Destination




Sydney Airport







Take-off Commenced

No



Flight Airborne

No



Flight Completed

No



Phase of Flight

Standing








Location








Location - Airport

Airport

YSTW




HF

Tag(s)


              ATC clearance error,
              Distraction,
              Fatigue,
              Procedural non compliance
          




RI

Tag(s)


              ATC error,
              Incursion pre Take off
          




Outcome

Damage or injury

Yes



Non-aircraft damage

Yes



Non-occupant Casualties

No



Off Airport Landing

Yes



Ditching

Yes




Causal Factor Group(s)

Group(s)

Air Traffic Management




Safety Recommendation(s)

Group(s)

None Made




Investigation Type

Type

Independent









Description
On 7 February 2008, a Bombardier DHC8-300 being operated by Eastern Australia AL for Qantas on a scheduled passenger flight from Tamworth to Sydney was inadvertently cleared for take off from runway 30R whilst a bird scaring vehicle was already on the runway having previously received a valid clearance to that effect from the same controller. As the aircraft crew could see the vehicle, they did not commence take off.
Investigation
An Investigation was carried out by the Australian Transport Safety Bureau (ATSB). It was found that there had been no actual risk of collision due to the awareness of the conflict by both the aircraft crew and the vehicle driver involved. It was noted that the bird scaring vehicle had been operating on the runway for about five minutes prior to the issue of the conflicting take off clearance.
The airport operations officer driving the bird scaring vehicle reported that he had been monitoring the TWR radio frequency and when he heard the take-off clearance being issued to the DHC8, he had advised the TWR that he would vacate the runway and had subsequently done so. The DHC8 flight crew had observed the vehicle on the runway and so did not commence the takeoff which was subsequently cancelled.
The airport operations officer driving the bird scaring vehicle reported that he had been monitoring the TWR radio frequency and when he heard the take-off clearance being issued to the DHC8, he had advised the TWR that he would vacate the runway and had subsequently done so. The DHC8 flight crew had observed the vehicle on the runway and so did not commence the takeoff which was subsequently cancelled.
The Investigation considered that whilst the incident controller was not necessarily unfit for duty, an examination of his recent work and rest schedule and sleep hours suggested that they “may not have been conducive to optimal alertness levels”. It was therefore possible that he was experiencing fatigue at the time of the occurrence which may have affected his normally high performance standards.
The Investigation formally concluded that “the aerodrome controller’s scan of the flight strip board and runway had not been effective” and noted that there was a possibility that he “may have been experiencing the effects of fatigue” given the relatively high level of radio transmissions in the period preceding the occurrence.
The Final Report Aviation Investigation AO-2008-006 of the Investigation was released on 20 August 2010. No Safety Recommendations were made.
Further Reading

Runway Incursion
ATC Radio Use by Airside Vehicles
Fatigue
Situational Awareness
Vigilance in ATM
Perception in ATC