B738, Goteborg Sweden, 2003











  B738, Goteborg Sweden, 2003









Summary

On 7 December 2003, a Boeing 737-800 being operated by SAS on a passenger charter flight from Salzburg, Austria to Stockholm Arlanda with an intermediate stop at Goteborg made a high speed rejected take off during the departure from Goteborg because of an un-commanded premature rotation. There were no injuries to any occupants and no damage to the aircraft which taxied back to the gate.




Event Details

When

07/12/2003



Event Type


GND,
              HF,
              LOC




Day/Night

Night



Flight Conditions

On Ground - Normal Visibility







Flight Details

Aircraft


 

BOEING 737-800









Operator

SAS



Type of Flight

Public Transport (Passenger)



Flight Origin




Gothenburg City







Intended Destination




Stockholm/Arlanda







Take-off Commenced

Yes



Flight Airborne

No



Flight Completed

No



Phase of Flight

Take Off








Location








Location - Airport

Airport

ESGP




HF

Tag(s)


              Aircraft acceptance,
              Data use error,
              Flight / Cabin Crew Co-operation,
              Ineffective Monitoring
          




GND

Tag(s)


              Passenger Loading
          




LOC

Tag(s)


              Aircraft Loading,
              Temporary Control Loss
          




Outcome

Damage or injury

Yes



Aircraft damage

None



Non-aircraft damage

Yes



Non-occupant Casualties

No



Occupant Injuries

None



Occupant Fatalities

None



Off Airport Landing

Yes



Ditching

Yes




Causal Factor Group(s)

Group(s)

Aircraft Operation




Safety Recommendation(s)

Group(s)

Aircraft Operation




Investigation Type

Type

Independent









Description
On 7 December 2003, a Boeing 737-800 being operated by SAS on a passenger charter flight from Salzburg, Austria to Stockholm Arlanda with an intermediate stop at Goteborg made a high speed rejected take off during the departure from Goteborg because of an un-commanded premature rotation. There were no injuries to any occupants and no damage to the aircraft which taxied back to the gate.
Investigation
An investigation into the Incident was carried out by the Accident Investigation Board Sweden. It was found that the airline was operating a series charter flight from Salzburg to Stockholm with an intermediate stop at Göteborg to allow 59 of the passengers to leave (but none to join). After this, 121 remained. Whilst on the ground at Goteborg, the cabin crew noted that most of the remaining passengers were sitting towards the back of the cabin. This was pointed out to the commander, who decided not to take any action until he had seen the loadsheet. When this arrived, it showed that the passengers were evenly distributed in the cabin and that the mass and balance limitations in force were met. The First Officer had been designated PF. After the take off roll commenced, as the aircraft was approaching 80 knots, PF noted that aircraft nose was lifting spontaneously without him moving the control column. He advised the aircraft commander who took over the control and rejected the takeoff.
It was easily discovered once back at the gate that the passenger distribution shown on the load and trim sheet was not where the passengers were actually sitting. As a result, the aircraft centre of gravity was significantly aft of the allowable limit at 38 % MAC, compared to the 25% MAC shown on the load and trim sheet and which had been the determinant of the stabiliser trim setting for take off.
The Investigation examined the application of the standard SAS system for load and trim sheet production in respect of the incident flight and found that it was fundamentally flawed as well as vulnerable to errors of sequence that could - and did - easily arise. It also noted the aircraft commander, having received a helpful but not-required communication from the cabin crew about a passenger loading distribution which was clearly abnormal, had forgotten about this by the time the loadsheet and its stated balance of passenger distribution arrived and he accepted it as presented. It was also noted that the SAS Quality Assurance system had completely failed to identify structural shortcomings in the SAS system for load and trim sheet preparation.
The formal statement of cause produced by the Investigation was that it was caused by “shortcomings in the routines and computer systems used in the production of loadsheets.”
Safety Recommendations
As a result of the Investigation, three Safety Recommendations were made to the Swedish Civil Aviation Authority:

to seek in international air safety work to ensure that the supervisory authorities concerned place higher demands on the quality assurance, including verification and validation, with reference also to human factors, of operational aids systems that can affect flight safety (RL 2005:20e R1)


to require information and acknowledgement anytime a calculated or default value is used instead of a verified value for computer systems used by pilots for planning purpose and affecting flight safety (RL 2005:20e R2)


for all passenger traffic with heavy aircraft, to introduce a requirement for physical checks of passenger seating throughout the cabin versus loadsheet data where computerised systems are used in the production of loadsheets (RL 2005:20e R3)

The Final Report of the Investigation was published on 29 September 2005 and may be see in full at SKYbrary bookshelf: Report RL 2005:20e
Further Reading

Aircraft Load and Trim
Passenger Cabin Loading
Rejected Take Off
Cross-checking Process