MD83, vicinity Dublin Airport, Ireland, 2007











  MD83, vicinity Dublin Airport, Ireland, 2007









Summary

On 16 August 2007, during a non-precision approach to RWY34 at Dublin airport, the flight crew of a MD83 misidentified the lights of a 16-storey hotel at Santry Cross as those of the runway approach lighting system. The aircraft deviated to the left of the approach course and descended below the Minimum Descent Altitude (MDA) without proper visual recognition of the runway in use. A go-around was initiated as soon as ATC corrective clearance was issued.




Event Details

When

16/08/2007



Event Type


CFIT,
              HF




Day/Night

Night



Flight Conditions

On Ground - Normal Visibility







Flight Details

Aircraft


 

MCDONNELL DOUGLAS MD-83









Operator

Not Recorded



Type of Flight

Public Transport (Passenger)



Flight Origin




Lisbon Humberto Delgado Airport







Intended Destination




Dublin Airport







Take-off Commenced

Yes



Flight Airborne

Yes



Flight Completed

Yes



Phase of Flight

Descent








Location








Location - Airport

Airport

EIDW




General

Tag(s)


              Non Precision Approach,
              Event reporting non compliant
          




CFIT

Tag(s)


              Into terrain,
              Lateral Navigation Error,
              Vertical navigation error
          




HF

Tag(s)


              Spatial Disorientation,
              Distraction,
              Ineffective Monitoring
          




Outcome

Damage or injury

No



Aircraft damage

None



Non-aircraft damage

No



Non-occupant Casualties

No



Occupant Injuries

None



Occupant Fatalities

None



Off Airport Landing

No



Ditching

No




Causal Factor Group(s)

Group(s)

Aircraft Operation




Safety Recommendation(s)

Group(s)

Aircraft Operation
Air Traffic Management




Investigation Type

Type

Independent









Description
On 16 August 2007, a MCDONNELL DOUGLAS MD-83 departed Lisbon with the Co-pilot as Pilot Flying (PF) on a scheduled passenger flight FLT344E to Dublin, Ireland. The flight progressed without incident until commencing its approach to Dublin Airport. The approach was made at night; the weather and visibility were good. As scheduled maintenance on the main runway (RWY 10-28) was under way, RWY 34 was in use for landing. The flight was cleared by Air Traffic Control (ATC) to carry out a non-precision approach to RWY 34. During the approach, at approximately 5 nm from touchdown, the aircraft began to deviate left of the approach course. This deviation was due to the Flight Crew mis-identifying the lights of a 16-storey hotel at Santry Cross as those of the runway approach lighting system on RWY 34 (See: Figure 1). The aircraft descended below the Minimum Descent Altitude (MDA) without proper visual recognition of the runway in use, and descended to an altitude of 580 ft above mean sea level (AMSL) before ATC issuing instruction for right turn and climb. At the point the go-around commenced, the aircraft was approximately 1,700 ft from the building and 200 ft above it. The aircraft subsequently landed without further incident after vectoring for Instrument Landing System (ILS) approach for RWY 16.

Figure 1. View of the RWY 34 approach at 5.5 NM to touchdown, with the Hotel building at Santry Cross indicated on the left of the photograph.Source: AAIU Report 2009-010
The Investigation
The investigation of the Serious Incident came to the following probable cause:
The decision of the Flight Crew, to continue an approach using visual cues alone, having mis-identified the lights of a building with the approach lights of the landing runway.
Along with the latter, several contributing factors are mentioned. Some of them are the visual resemblance of the building in night conditions with the approach lights, non-adherence to Company SOPs, poor Crew Resource Management (Crew Resource Management), etc.
The recommendations comprise comprehensive review of the CRM training of the operator and airport control tower manning level examination by IAA. Furthermore, the IAA, when considering the type and positioning of warning lights specified for an obstacle in the vicinity of an aerodrome, should take account of the potential for confusion by pilots of such lights with visual navigation aids at the aerodrome.
Related Articles

Controlled Flight Into Terrain (CFIT)
Situational Awareness
Situational Awareness (OGHFA BN)
Non-stabilized Approach After ATC-Requested Runway Change (OGHFA SE)

Further Reading

For further information see the AAIU Final Report