B733, vicinity Helsinki Finland, 2008











  B733, vicinity Helsinki Finland, 2008









Summary

On 26 March 2008, a Ukraine International Airlines Boeing 737-300 being vectored by ATC to the ILS at destination Helsinki in IMC descended below its cleared altitude and came close to a telecommunications mast. ATC noticed the deviation and instructed a climb. The investigation attributed the non-compliance with the accepted descent clearance to the failure of the flight crew to operate in accordance with SOPs. It was also noted that the way in which ATC safety systems were installed and configured at the time of the occurrence had precluded earlier ATC awareness of the hazard caused by the altitude deviation.




Event Details

When

26/03/2008



Event Type


CFIT,
              HF,
              LB




Day/Night

Day



Flight Conditions

IMC







Flight Details

Aircraft


 

BOEING 737-300









Operator

Ukraine International Airlines



Type of Flight

Public Transport (Passenger)



Intended Destination




Helsinki/Vantaa







Take-off Commenced

Yes



Flight Airborne

Yes



Flight Completed

Yes



Phase of Flight

Descent








Location








Location - Airport

Airport

EFHK




General

Tag(s)


              Altimeter Setting Error,
              Event reporting non compliant,
              Inadequate Aircraft Operator Procedures,
              Inadequate ATC Procedures
          




CFIT

Tag(s)


              Into terrain,
              Vertical navigation error,
              IFR flight plan
          




HF

Tag(s)


              Data use error,
              Distraction,
              Ineffective Monitoring,
              Procedural non compliance,
              Ineffective Monitoring - SIC as PF
          




LB

Tag(s)


              Accepted ATC Clearance not followed,
              Manual flight
          




Outcome

Damage or injury

Yes



Non-aircraft damage

Yes



Non-occupant Casualties

No



Off Airport Landing

Yes



Ditching

Yes




Causal Factor Group(s)

Group(s)

Aircraft Operation




Safety Recommendation(s)

Group(s)

Aircraft Operation
Air Traffic Management




Investigation Type

Type

Independent









Description
On 26 March 2008, a Ukraine International Airlines’ Boeing 737-300 operating a scheduled passenger flight from Kiev to Helsinki descended below its ATC cleared altitude and MSA in day IMC whilst being vectored to the ILS and camer close to a telecommunications mast before ATC noticed the error and ordered it to immediately return to the cleared altiude. There were no abupt manoeuvres and none of the 29 occupants were injured.
Investigation
An Investigation was carried out by the Accident Investigation Board Finland (AIBF). FDR and CVR data was not available but QAR data was and this proved invaluable to the Investigation. This data showed that the aircraft had descended to an altitude of 1400-1500 feet in the vicinity of the 1227 feet high mast before ATC instructed a climb. It was noted that the First Officer had been PF.
It was concluded that "the incident was caused by an incorrect altimeter pressure setting indicating an altitude which was more than 1000 ft erroneous. The wrong altimeter setting was the result of the pilots deviating from their SOPs (SOP). The detection of the incident was delayed by the facts that the Terrain Awareness and Warning System (EGPWS) did not warn of the telecommunications mast and that the MSAW (MSAW) feature in use at Helsinki Air Traffic Control is not utilised for alerting infringements of the minimum safe altitude. Furthermore, investigation revealed that, in violation of airline regulations, the pilots did not report the incident to the aviation authorities or to the airline. The air traffic controller did report the occurrence, albeit simply as an incident. However, by definition, it was a serious incident."

In respect of Probable Cause, the Investigation found that: "The serious incident was caused when the aircraft descended below its ATC clearance altitude, creating the risk of collision with a telecommunications mast ahead of its track. The cause of breaking the clearance altitude was an erroneous altimeter setting. Contributing factors included inadequacies in Crew Resource Management and the fact that the pilots deviated from Standard Operating Procedures."
The following Safety Recommendations were made as a result of the Investigation:

that the airline ensure that their pilots possess the required information and skills for proper Crew Resource Management, as required by the safe conduct of aviation and compliance with airline operations manuals.
that Finavia incorporate a Minimum Safe Altitude Warning (MSAW) feature for the Helsinki Terminal Control Area in its next radar software update. "

Related Articles
Altimeter Setting Procedures

Use of Radio Altimeter
Terrain Awareness
Level Bust
Minimum Safe Altitude (MSA)
CRM Skills Training (OGHFA BN)

Further Reading

The full AIB Finland Report (Investigation Report C4/2008L)