A320, vicinity Addis Ababa Ethiopia, 2003











  A320, vicinity Addis Ababa Ethiopia, 2003









Summary

On 31 March 2003, an A320, operated by British Mediterranean AW, narrowly missed colliding with terrain during a non-precision approach to Addis Ababa, Ethiopia.




Event Details

When

31/03/2003



Event Type


CFIT




Day/Night

Night



Flight Conditions

IMC







Flight Details

Aircraft


 

AIRBUS A-320









Operator

BMED



Type of Flight

Public Transport (Passenger)



Flight Origin




Alexandria/El Nouzha Airport







Intended Destination




Bole International







Actual Destination




Djibouti







Take-off Commenced

Yes



Flight Airborne

Yes



Flight Completed

Yes



Phase of Flight

Descent








Location








Location - Airport

Airport

HAAB




CFIT

Tag(s)


              Into terrain,
              Lateral Navigation Error,
              IFR flight plan
          




Outcome

Damage or injury

No



Non-aircraft damage

No



Non-occupant Casualties

No



Off Airport Landing

No



Ditching

No




Causal Factor Group(s)

Group(s)

Air Traffic Management




Safety Recommendation(s)

Group(s)

Aircraft Airworthiness
Air Traffic Management




Investigation Type

Type

Independent









Description
On 31 March 2003, an AIRBUS A-320, operated by British Mediterranean AW, narrowly missed colliding with terrain during a non-precision approach to Addis Ababa, Ethiopia.
Synopsis
The following is an extract taken from the UK AAIB report into the incident:
"[The] A320..on a flight from Alexandria…to Addis Ababa, Ethiopia, carried out two approaches using Addis Ababa [VOR] and associated…DME. On the second approach the aircraft crossed over a ridge of high ground in…IMC and came within 56 feet of terrain at a location 5 nm to the northeast of the airport. As the aircraft croosed the ridge the crew, alerted a few seconds earlier by a radio altimeter (RA) height callout, carried out a go-around: at the same time the…EGPWS generated a "TOO LOW TERRAIN" aural alert.
The investigation determined that the antenna of the ADS VOR had suffered water ingress and was not functioning correctly. The correct maintenance procedures for the ADS VOR/DME and its associated monitoring equipment were not followed.
The aircraft received erroneous information from the ADS VOR which was fed to the flight deck VOR display, the FMS, the navigation displays and the EGPWS computer with its associated Terrain Awareness Display (TAD). A single common position source error thus adversely affected all these apparently independent navigation/situational awareness systems. The existing certification standards for the aircraft navigation systems were met but were not sufficient to protect against this problem."
Related Articles

Controlled Flight Into Terrain (CFIT)

Further Reading

For more information, see the full AAIB report


Accident and Serious Incident Reports: CFIT contains details of other accidents and incidents which resulted in, or might have resulted in, a CFIT