AT43, vicinity Geneva Switzerland, 2006











  AT43, vicinity Geneva Switzerland, 2006









Summary

On 29 March 2006 at about 1 mile from touchdown when in VMC on a night approach to destination Geneva, an ATR 42-300 being operated by Farnair on a cargo flight experienced a sudden electrical fire in the flight deck and an emergency was declared to ATC. Despite this situation the aircraft was able to land normally and vacate the runway via an RET after which it was forced to stop.




Event Details

When

29/03/2006



Event Type


AW,
              FIRE




Day/Night

Night



Flight Conditions

On Ground - Normal Visibility







Flight Details

Aircraft


 

ATR ATR-42-300/320









Operator

Farnair



Type of Flight

Public Transport (Cargo)



Flight Origin




Cologne/Bonn Airport







Intended Destination




Geneva Cointrin International Airport







Take-off Commenced

Yes



Flight Airborne

Yes



Flight Completed

Yes



Phase of Flight

Descent








Location








Location - Airport

Airport

LSGG




General

Tag(s)


              Inadequate Airworthiness Procedures
          




FIRE

Tag(s)


              Fire-Electrical origin
          




EPR

Tag(s)


              MAYDAY declaration,
              RFFS Procedures
          




AW

System(s)


              Electrical Power
          



Contributor(s)


              Maintenance Error (valid guidance available),
              Damage Tolerance,
              Component Fault in service
          




Outcome

Damage or injury

Yes



Aircraft damage

Minor



Non-aircraft damage

Yes



Non-occupant Casualties

No



Off Airport Landing

Yes



Ditching

Yes




Causal Factor Group(s)

Group(s)

Aircraft Technical




Safety Recommendation(s)

Group(s)

None Made




Investigation Type

Type

Independent









Description
On 29 March 2006 at about 1 mile from touchdown when in VMC on a night approach to destination Geneva, an ATR 42-300 being operated by Farnair on a cargo flight experienced a sudden electrical fire in the flight deck and an emergency was declared to ATC. Despite this situation the aircraft was able to land normally and vacate the runway via an RET after which it was forced to stop. A significant loss of onboard systems was reported to have occurred due to many CBs tripping. However, because of this, the fire on board had lasted for only a few seconds and external intervention was not necessary to fight the fire.
The Investigation
The Swiss BEA/BFU carried out a Serious Incident Investigation which was published on 8 April 2009. The Findings included the following:

an earth cable was fitted incorrectly. Its lower terminal was therefore in direct contact with the strand of electrical wiring, whereas there should have been a space of at least 12.5 mm (0.5 in) between these two items.
The tubular support to which the strand was mounted was deformed; the routing of the bundle of wires modified in this way no longer permitted compliance with the minimum separations required between the structure and other cables.
The collars used to mount the strand to the tubular structure were not tightened sufficiently.
The damaged strand contained more electrical wires than the original design because of modifications resulting from application of service bulletins; its diameter had therefore increased.
It was not possible to determine the precise origin of the assembly defects.

The cause of the occurrence was determined to be “due to an incipient fire caused by a short-circuit following several assembly defects”.
As a result of the occurrence, the aircraft manufacturer conducted an investigation among several ATR 42/72 operators to find out if other cases of incorrect assembly of the same earth cable existed. The results showed that several instances of this fault had been found. On 14 September 2006, EASA issued an AD requiring inspection of all ATR 42/72 aircraft in which the risk of a similar short-circuit resulting from this assembly defect might exist by 31 December 2006. No Safety Recommendations were therefore made in the Final Report.
Related Articles
Fire

Fire in the Air
Fire Triangle
Aircraft Fire Detection Systems
Aircraft Fire Extinguishing Systems
Accident and Serious Incident Reports: FIRE

Further Reading

Final Report