AT43, vicinity Stansted UK, 2007











  AT43, vicinity Stansted UK, 2007









Summary

On 18 January 2007 an ATR 42-300 freighter developed a control difficulty just after a night take off from Stansted UK, which led the flight crew to declare an emergency and undertake an immediate return to land. The landing was uneventful but the approach flown was unstable, with EGPWS warnings, and the origin of the handling difficulty was considered to be, in part, due to inappropriate control inputs by one of the pilots.




Event Details

When

18/01/2007



Event Type


HF,
              LOC




Day/Night

Night



Flight Conditions

On Ground - Normal Visibility







Flight Details

Aircraft


 

ATR ATR-42-300/320









Operator

Not Recorded



Type of Flight

Public Transport (Cargo)



Flight Origin




London Stansted Airport







Intended Destination




Dublin Airport







Actual Destination




London Stansted Airport







Take-off Commenced

Yes



Flight Airborne

Yes



Flight Completed

Yes



Phase of Flight

Climb








Location








Location - Airport

Airport

EGSS




General

Tag(s)


              Approach not stabilised
          




HF

Tag(s)


              Inappropriate crew response (automatics),
              Ineffective Monitoring,
              Manual Handling
          




LOC

Tag(s)


              Temporary Control Loss,
              Extreme Bank,
              Take off Trim Setting
          




EPR

Tag(s)


              “Emergency” declaration
          




Outcome

Damage or injury

Yes



Non-aircraft damage

Yes



Non-occupant Casualties

No



Off Airport Landing

Yes



Ditching

Yes




Causal Factor Group(s)

Group(s)

Aircraft Operation




Safety Recommendation(s)

Group(s)

Aircraft Airworthiness




Investigation Type

Type

Independent









Description
On 18 January 2007 an ATR 42-300 freighter developed a control difficulty just after a night take off from Stansted UK, which led the flight crew to declare an emergency and undertake an immediate return to land. The landing was uneventful but the approach flown was unstable, with Terrain Avoidance and Warning System (TAWS) warnings, and the origin of the handling difficulty was considered to be, in part, due to inappropriate control inputs by one of the pilots.
Synopsis
This is an extract from the report published by the Aircraft Accident Investigation Branch (UK) (AAIB), UK:
"Soon after takeoff from London Stansted Airport the aircraft developed a yawing motion which persisted as a yawing/rolling motion of varying severity. The yaw damper could not be engaged. An emergency was declared and the aircraft returned to Stansted. No mechanical fault was found which would have caused the motion, although an undetected and intermittent fault affecting components within the rudder control system could have degraded the aircraft’s handling characteristics with the yaw damper not engaged, as could a takeoff with the rudder control system incorrectly configured. The nature of the motion and observed control deflections were such that an inadvertent and inappropriate rudder input by a pilot would have been required for the oscillations to persist.
Four Safety Recommendations were made, concerning operational advice to flight crews and ongoing serviceability checks for Flight Data Recorders (FDRs)."
Related Articles
LOC

Loss of Control

Further Reading
For further information see the full report published by the AAIB (UK).