B763, vicinity Gatwick UK, 1999











  B763, vicinity Gatwick UK, 1999









Summary

On 18 October 1999, a Boeing 767-300 encountered a flock of wood pigeons, at 450 feet agl after take off from London Gatwick, and the ingestion of one caused sufficient distress to the left engine for it to be shut down and an air turn back made; it was subsequently concluded that the degree of damage caused was inconsistent with the applicable requirements of engine certification.




Event Details

When

18/10/1999



Event Type


AW,
              BS




Day/Night

Day



Flight Conditions

Not Recorded







Flight Details

Aircraft


 

BOEING 767-300ER









Operator

Not Recorded



Type of Flight

Public Transport (Passenger)



Flight Origin




London Gatwick Airport







Actual Destination




London Gatwick Airport







Take-off Commenced

Yes



Flight Airborne

Yes



Flight Completed

Yes



Phase of Flight

Climb








Location








Location - Airport

Airport

EGKK




General

Tag(s)


              Inadequate Airworthiness Procedures
          




BS

Tag(s)


              Flocking Birds,
              Engine damage,
              Engine Ingestion
          




AW

System(s)


              Engine - General
          



Contributor(s)


              Damage Tolerance
          




Outcome

Damage or injury

Yes



Aircraft damage

Major



Non-aircraft damage

Yes



Non-occupant Casualties

No



Occupant Injuries

None



Occupant Fatalities

None



Off Airport Landing

Yes



Ditching

Yes




Causal Factor Group(s)

Group(s)

Aircraft Technical




Safety Recommendation(s)

Group(s)

None Made




Investigation Type

Type

Independent









Description
On 18 October 1999, a Boeing 767-300 encountered a flock of wood pigeons, at 450 feet agl after take off from London Gatwick, and the ingestion of one caused sufficient distress to the left engine for it to be shut down and an air turn back made; it was subsequently concluded that the degree of damage caused was inconsistent with the applicable requirements of engine certification.
Synopsis
The following is an extract from the official AAIB report:
"The aircraft had just taken off and climbed to about 450 feet agl when there was a 'bang' and the No 2 engine ran down. This was accompanied by severe vibration and a number of passengers saw flames coming from the right engine at that time. The pilots, who had both seen a flock of birds disappear under the aircraft just before the incident, believed they had suffered a birdstrike and shutdown the No 2 engine. The commander elected to return immediately and subsequently made an uneventful overweight landing back at Gatwick.
Subsequent Inspection of the No 2 engine found that one of the fan blades had fractured and had released the outer third (9 inches) of the blade which had become embedded in the fan duct acoustic lining, just ahead of the outlet guide vanes. Bird remains were evident in the engine and the fan blades adjacent to the one which had fractured exhibited typical soft body impact damage, with minor curling of their tips. The fan tip-path abradable lining had been heavily gouged and a segment, extending over some 20° of arc, was missing. There were several holes and tears in the acoustic lining. There was no evidence that any damaging debris had not been contained by the nacelle.
Metallurgical examination of the fractured blade parts revealed no evidence of a pre-existing crack, nor of any other material defect which might have rendered the blade particularly vulnerable to the bird impact. In order to meet the relevant Airworthiness Certification Requirements before entry into service, this engine type had to demonstrate its ability to withstand ingestion of a volley of eight medium sized birds (1.5 lbs each) at take off power with an acceptably small reduction in thrust, the minimum acceptable residual thrust being 75%. During the associated Certification test on this engine type, the engine absorbed the required volley of birds satisfactorily and therefore passed this test. Indeed, the test engine was apparently then used for further Certification tests without significant rectification work having being required. Although the pigeon which was struck may have been marginally above the 1.5 lbs weight for the 'medium bird' specified in Requirements, it would not have been expected to have had the capability of causing a fan blade to fracture. In service experience of ingestion of similar sized and considerably larger birds has shown that this engine type has continued to operate normally for the remainder of the flights affected. Previous ingestions of considerably larger single birds have been sustained by engines of this type and they have subsequently continued to operate almost normally. The RB 211 engine type has therefore generally been regarded as being more robust than required with respect to bird ingestion."
Related Articles

Aircraft Certification for Bird Strike Risk
Bird Strike
Airworthiness

Further Reading

For further information, see the full AAIB Report into the incident