MD81, vicinity Chicago Midway, IL USA, 2008











  MD81, vicinity Chicago Midway, IL USA, 2008









Summary

On 7 July 2008, a Mc Donnell Douglas MD81 being operated by Midwest Airlines, Inc. had just taken off in day visual flight conditions when increasing pitch could initially not be controlled. Later, control was regained but with “higher than normal” pitch control pressure required to control the aircraft - after en-route diversion the aircraft landed uneventfully.




Event Details

When

07/07/2008



Event Type


AW,
              LOC




Day/Night

Day



Flight Conditions

VMC







Flight Details

Aircraft


 

MCDONNELL DOUGLAS MD-81









Operator

Midwest Airlines



Type of Flight

Public Transport (Passenger)



Flight Origin




Chicago Midway International Airport







Intended Destination




Charlotte Douglas International Airport







Actual Destination




St. Louis/Lambert International Airport







Take-off Commenced

Yes



Flight Airborne

Yes



Flight Completed

Yes



Phase of Flight

Climb








Location








Location - Airport

Airport

KMDW




LOC

Tag(s)


              Temporary Control Loss,
              Extreme Pitch
          




AW

System(s)


              Equipment / Furnishings
          



Contributor(s)


              Contributing ADD,
              Component Fault in service
          




Outcome

Damage or injury

Yes



Aircraft damage

Minor



Non-aircraft damage

No



Non-occupant Casualties

No



Occupant Injuries

None



Occupant Fatalities

None



Off Airport Landing

No



Ditching

No




Causal Factor Group(s)

Group(s)

Aircraft Operation




Safety Recommendation(s)

Group(s)

None Made




Investigation Type

Type

Independent









Description
On 7 July 2008, a Mc Donnell Douglas MD81 being operated on a US domestic ad hoc passenger charter by Midwest Airlines had just taken off from Chicago Midway Airport in day visual flight conditions when increasing pitch could initially not be controlled. As pitch was approaching 30 degrees nose up, flight crew control column and stabiliser pitch trim inputs resulted in control being regained but with “higher than normal” pitch control pressure required to control the aircraft thereafter. Since this condition could not be resolved by flight crew action using available drills or after consultation with the operator’s ground maintenance staff, an en route diversion to St Louis MO was initiated and completed uneventfully.
The Investigation
The Investigation was carried out by the National Transportation Safety Board (USA) (NTSB). Their Report attributed the control difficulty to an inflation of the tailcone evacuation slide which had occurred during aircraft rotation at take off when the unsecured slide cover had moved and initiated slide inflation. No airworthiness explanation for the unsecured status of the slide container could be established, nor any previous history of related tailcone slide problems on this or any of the Operator’s other similar aircraft. It was noted that the area containing the slide container is a rear emergency cabin exit which can be accessed “from the passenger compartment through the aft bulkhead pressure door and aft accessory compartment”
It also noted that the passengers on the flight had included US Secret Service Personnel on duty because of the identity of the primary passenger and stated that:
“The results of an internal USSS investigation relating to security sweeps of the incident aircraft revealed that no USSS personnel or USSS support personnel interfered with or altered the aircraft’s hardware or systems relating to the tailcone evacuation slide.”
Related Articles

Loss of Control
Airworthiness

Further Reading

The full Report of the Investigation.