MD11, Dublin Ireland, 2002











  MD11, Dublin Ireland, 2002









Summary

On 3 February 2002, a Delta Airlines MD-11 encountered a sudden exceptional wind gust (43 kts) during the landing roll at Dublin, Ireland. The pilot was unable to maintain the directional control of the aircraft and a runway excursion to the side subsequently occurred.




Event Details

When

03/02/2002



Event Type


RE,
              WX




Day/Night

Day



Flight Conditions

On Ground - Normal Visibility







Flight Details

Aircraft


 

MCDONNELL DOUGLAS MD-11









Operator

Delta Air Lines



Type of Flight

Public Transport (Passenger)



Flight Origin




Atlanta/Hartsfield-Jackson International







Intended Destination




Dublin Airport







Take-off Commenced

Yes



Flight Airborne

Yes



Flight Completed

No



Phase of Flight

Landing








Location








Location - Airport

Airport

EIDW




General

Tag(s)


              Extra flight crew (no training)
          




RE

Tag(s)


              Overrun on Landing,
              Directional Control,
              Significant Crosswind Component,
              Off side of Runway
          




WX

Tag(s)


              Strong Surface Winds
          




Outcome

Damage or injury

Yes



Aircraft damage

Minor



Non-aircraft damage

Yes



Non-occupant Casualties

No



Occupant Injuries

None



Occupant Fatalities

None



Off Airport Landing

No



Ditching

No




Causal Factor Group(s)

Group(s)

Aircraft Operation




Safety Recommendation(s)

Group(s)

Airport Management




Investigation Type

Type

Independent









Description
On 3rd February 2002, a Delta Airlines MD-11 encountered a sudden exceptional wind gust (43 kts) during the landing roll at Dublin, Ireland. The pilot was unable to maintain the directional control of the aircraft and a runway excursion to the side subsequently occurred.
Synopsis
This is the synopsis from the official report into the incident published by the Irish Air Accident Investigation Unit:
"During its landing rollout on RWY 28 at EIDW, the MD 11, registered N803DE (Delta 129) started to initially drift towards the right and then slowly to the left-hand side of the runway. Efforts by the Captain, the pilot-flying (PF), to counteract this drift through the application of full right rudder and right tiller failed, and the aircraft departed the paved surface into the prepared graded ground, which was rain soaked. The Captain chose not to evacuate the passengers and crew through the emergency escape slides, preferring instead to wait for outside assistance and disembarkation by mobile stairs. After approximately two hours, passengers and crew commenced disembarkation through the forward right-side (R2) cabin door and down the mobile stairs where they were immediately bussed to the terminal building. There were no reported injuries."

The Report states the cause of the accident to have been:
"The cause of the runway excursion was that the aircraft was subjected to an unexpected and sudden wind gust during the initial stages of the landing rollout, inducing a rate of yaw to the left, which could not be controlled by the pilot flying."

Related Articles

Weather
Runway Excursion

Further Reading

For further information see the AAIU Ireland serious incident Report No: 2003/004