B733, en-route, Santa Barbara CA USA, 1999











  B733, en-route, Santa Barbara CA USA, 1999









Summary

On 2 September 1999, a United Airlines Boeing Boeing 737-300 in the cruise at FL240, experienced severe turbulence due to an encounter with the wake vortex from a preceding MD11 on a similar track which had climbed through the level of the B737 with minimum lateral separation, 1.5 minutes earlier.




Event Details

When

02/09/1999



Event Type


WAKE




Day/Night

Day



Flight Conditions

VMC







Flight Details

Aircraft


 

BOEING 737-300









Operator

United Airlines



Type of Flight

Public Transport (Passenger)



Flight Origin




Los Angeles International Airport







Intended Destination




San Francisco International Airport







Take-off Commenced

Yes



Flight Airborne

Yes



Flight Completed

Yes



Phase of Flight

Cruise








Location

Approx.

near Santa Barbara, CA










WAKE

Tag(s)


              ICAO Standard Wake Separation prevailed,
              In trail event
          




CS

Tag(s)


              Turbulence Injury - Cabin Crew
          




Outcome

Damage or injury

Yes



Aircraft damage

Minor



Non-aircraft damage

Yes



Non-occupant Casualties

No



Occupant Injuries

Few occupants



Off Airport Landing

Yes



Ditching

Yes




Causal Factor Group(s)

Group(s)

Aircraft Operation




Safety Recommendation(s)

Group(s)

None Made




Investigation Type

Type

Independent









Description
On 2 September 1999, a United Airlines Boeing Boeing 737-300 in the cruise at FL240, experienced severe turbulence due to an encounter with the wake vortex from a preceding MCDONNELL DOUGLAS MD-11 on a similar track which had climbed through the level of the B737 with minimum lateral separation, 1.5 minutes earlier.
Synopsis
This is an extract from the official report into the accident published by the National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB).
"The flight had just leveled off at FL240 with the autopilot still engaged. The seat belt sign had been off for about 5 minutes, and the cabin crew was in the process of preparing a beverage service. The airplane was crossing a VORTAC when the flight encountered turbulence the crew categorized as 'severe,' with a rapid right roll and pitch excursion. The captain disconnected the autopilot and attempted to counter the excursions with control inputs. As a result of the aircraft motions, 1 flight attendant sustained serious injuries, and another flight attendant and 13 passengers sustained minor injuries. The airplane sustained minor damage, limited primarily to ceiling tiles and seats. A review of the meteorological data showed no evidence of any atmospheric phenomena in the area. A simulation study comparing the known airplane response to control inputs versus the motion of the airplane as recorded on the DFDR data showed that the flight controls alone did not cause the recorded motion of the airplane. Radar data established that the flight was in trail of a MD-11 by 11.5 nm and 97 seconds when the upset occurred. The MD-11 had climbed through the flight's cruise altitude and was 600 feet above the flight at the time of the encounter. Wake vortex studies by NASA have documented vortex descent rates between 270 and 440 feet per minute."
Related Articles
WAKE

Wake Vortex Turbulence;

Further Reading
For further information see the NTSB Report (LAX99LA291)