CRJ2, en-route, south of Santander Spain, 2009











  CRJ2, en-route, south of Santander Spain, 2009









Summary

On 24 February 2009, the Captain of a CRJ 200 being operated by Air Nostrum on a passenger flight from Madrid to Santander inadvertently shut down both engines simultaneously during the descent but a successful restart was rapidly achieved and the remainder of the flight was uneventful. The subsequent investigation concluded that the shutdown was the consequence of both violation of procedure and lack of knowledge of the Captain involved.




Event Details

When

24/02/2009



Event Type


HF,
              LOC




Day/Night

Night



Flight Conditions

IMC







Flight Details

Aircraft


 

BOMBARDIER Regional Jet CRJ-200









Operator

Air Nostrum



Type of Flight

Public Transport (Passenger)



Flight Origin




Madrid-Barajas Airport







Intended Destination




Santander Airport







Actual Destination




Santander Airport







Take-off Commenced

Yes



Flight Airborne

Yes



Flight Completed

Yes



Phase of Flight

Descent








Location

Approx.

55 NM South of Santander Airport










General

Tag(s)


              Inadequate Aircraft Operator Procedures
          




HF

Tag(s)


              Procedural non compliance,
              Violation
          




LOC

Tag(s)


              Loss of Engine Power,
              Temporary Control Loss
          




EPR

Tag(s)


              “Emergency” declaration
          




Outcome

Damage or injury

Yes



Non-aircraft damage

Yes



Non-occupant Casualties

No



Off Airport Landing

Yes



Ditching

Yes




Causal Factor Group(s)

Group(s)

Aircraft Operation




Safety Recommendation(s)

Group(s)

Aircraft Operation




Investigation Type

Type

Independent









Description
On 24 February 2009, a Bombardier CRJ200 being operated by Air Nostrum on a scheduled domestic passenger flight from Madrid to Santander suffered a double engine failure during descent in day Visual Meteorological Conditions (VMC) but a successful double restart was achieved and the flight to destination was completed without further event. None of the 48 occupants were injured and there was no damage to the aircraft.
Investigation
An Investigation was carried out by the Spanish CIAAIC. Flight Data Recorder (FDR) and Cockpit Voice Recorder (CVR) data were available to the Investigation. It was noted that both flight crew were experienced on the aircraft type and that the aircraft commander had been acting a PF on the incident flight. As the aircraft passed FL200, both engines had stopped and, with the speed above the necessary minimum of 240 KIAS, a successful restart had been achieved within approximately a minute by the prompt selection of continuous ignition in accordance with the applicable memory Quick Reference Handbook (QRH) drill. In accordance with design, the Air Driven Generator (ADG) had deployed when the engines stopped and the reduced electrical status had temporarily removed much of the functionality from the First Officer’s panel.
Shortly after the engines had been restarted, a Captain who was on board in the passenger cabin entered the flight deck and, on the suggestion of this pilot, the operating flight crew had belatedly declared an emergency to ATC and were “given landing priority” at destination. The ‘deadheading’ Captain had remained in the flight deck until the completion of the flight.
Extensive investigation found that all aircraft systems had functioned normally during the incident flight and it was concluded that the action of the PF in taking both thrust levers below the Idle position at the lower end of the ‘Flight’ range after overriding the mechanical stops designed to prevent inadvertent action to this effect was the cause of the shutdown.
It was noted that:

Some other aircraft types have a thrust control system which requires a second action in addition to thrust lever movement to achieve shutdown. It was confirmed that the design of the thrust control levers on the incident aircraft type complied will all applicable certification requirements.
The in-flight double engine failure procedure does not include task sharing between the flight crew and such did not occur during the event.

It was determined the Probable Cause of the shutdown of the engines in flight was the “placing the engine thrust levers below flight idle in an attempt to reduce engine thrust below flight idle”
Three Safety Recommendations were made as a result of the Investigation as follows:

that Air Nostrum modify the company operations manual to explicitly state that placing the thrust levers in any position below IDLE mark, between IDLE and SHUT OFF, could shut down the engines even before the SHUT OFF mark is reached. [REC 01/12]
that Air Nostrum include as part of its emergency actions the need to report the number of people onboard the aircraft whenever an emergency is declared. This is so as to avoid additional communications or interruptions during situations that may require a high workload. [REC 02/12]
that Air Nostrum modify its in-flight double engine failure emergency procedure so as to clearly define the task sharing and functions between the flight crew and allow for the efficient completion of the procedure and the restarting of the engines in flight. [REC 03/12]

The Final Report of the Investigation Report IN-005/2009 was approved for release on 3 May 2012.
Further Reading

Loss of Control
Cross-checking Process
Situational Awareness
Unexpected Events Training (OGHFA BN)
Adherence to SOPs (OGHFA BN)
Crew Resource Management (OGHFA BN)