JS41, Birmingham UK, 2007











  JS41, Birmingham UK, 2007









Summary

On 26 June 2007, at Birmingham Airport UK, a BAe Jetstream 41 started an engine running pushback without using intercom between ground crew and flight crew. The pushback could not be completed as the towbar could not be disconnected and confusion over a decision to return the aircraft to the gate resulted in an attempt to do so with the aircraft brakes selected which caused the aircraft nose landing gear to collapse.




Event Details

When

26/06/2007



Event Type


GND,
              HF




Day/Night

Day



Flight Conditions

On Ground - Normal Visibility







Flight Details

Aircraft


 

BRITISH AEROSPACE Jetstream 41









Operator

Not Recorded



Type of Flight

Public Transport (Passenger)



Flight Origin




Birmingham International Airport







Take-off Commenced

No



Flight Airborne

No



Flight Completed

No



Phase of Flight

Pushback/towing








Location








Location - Airport

Airport

EGBB




HF

Tag(s)


              Flight Crew / Ground Crew Co-operation,
              Procedural non compliance
          




GND

Tag(s)


              Towed aircraft involved,
              Aircraft Push Back
          




Outcome

Damage or injury

Yes



Aircraft damage

Minor



Non-aircraft damage

No



Non-occupant Casualties

No



Occupant Injuries

None



Occupant Fatalities

None



Off Airport Landing

No



Ditching

No




Causal Factor Group(s)

Group(s)

Airport Operation




Safety Recommendation(s)

Group(s)

None Made




Investigation Type

Type

Independent









Synopsis
On 26 June 2007, at Birmingham Airport UK, a BAe Jetstream 41 started an engine running pushback without using intercom between ground crew and flight crew. The pushback could not be completed as the towbar could not be disconnected and confusion over a decision to return the aircraft to the gate resulted in an attempt to do so with the aircraft brakes selected which caused the aircraft nose landing gear to collapse.
Description
The Report into the Accident produced by UK AAIB states:
"The aircraft was pushed back from Stand 2 at Birmingham Airport onto the centerline of Taxiway W, the parking brake was applied and the nose wheel was chocked. After the pushback the ground crew were unable to disconnect the towbar. The aircraft commander decided to return the aircraft to the stand. Headsets had not been used during the pushback and communication was via hand signals. The tug attempted to pull the aircraft back onto stand whilst the aircraft parking brake was still applied, and the nose gear collapsed."
Conclusions
The Report includes the following conclusions:
"Pushbacks are a routine manoeuvre, normally performed with headset communications between the flight deck and the pushback crew. The airport instructions and the operator’s towing procedures make no allowance for aircraft pushbacks without headsets. Nevertheless, it was not unusual for them to be conducted using hand signals only. Ground handling staff have now been instructed to use a headset at all times. A routine pushback became unusual when it was necessary to return the aircraft to stand. There’s no hand signal for ‘I would like to return to stand’ and the commander had difficulty in conveying his wishes to the pushback crew. The resulting breakdown in communication led to the aircraft being damaged."
The Report produces no Safety Recommendations.
Related Articles

Ground Operations
Pushback
Aircraft Towing

Further Reading

AAIB Bulletin 10/2007 - AAIB UK.