B744, Gardermoen Norway, 2004











  B744, Gardermoen Norway, 2004









Summary

On 21 September 2004, a Korean Air Boeing 747-400F experienced handling difficulties on take off due to the Centre of Gravity (CofG) being aft of the limit as a result of misloading.




Event Details

When

02/09/2004



Event Type


GND,
              LOC




Day/Night

Day



Flight Conditions

On Ground - Normal Visibility







Flight Details

Aircraft


 

BOEING 747-400 (international, winglets)









Operator

Korean Air



Type of Flight

Public Transport (Cargo)



Flight Origin




Oslo/Gardermoen Airport







Intended Destination




Incheon International Airport







Take-off Commenced

Yes



Flight Airborne

Yes



Flight Completed

Yes



Phase of Flight

Take Off








Location








Location - Airport

Airport

ENGM




GND

Tag(s)


              Cargo Loading,
              Hold Loading
          




LOC

Tag(s)


              Aircraft Loading,
              Temporary Control Loss,
              Extreme Pitch
          




EPR

Tag(s)


              RFFS Procedures
          




Outcome

Damage or injury

Yes



Aircraft damage

None



Non-aircraft damage

Yes



Non-occupant Casualties

No



Occupant Injuries

None



Occupant Fatalities

None



Off Airport Landing

Yes



Ditching

Yes




Causal Factor Group(s)

Group(s)

Aircraft Operation




Safety Recommendation(s)

Group(s)

Aircraft Operation
Airport Management




Investigation Type

Type

Independent









Description
On 21 September 2004, a Korean Air Boeing 747-400F experienced handling difficulties on take off due to the Centre of Gravity (CofG) being aft of the limit as a result of misloading.
Synopsis
This is an extract of the summary from the Accident Investigation Board Norway (AIBN) serious incident report:
"On 21 September 2004, at time 1302, a B747-400F operated by Korean Air was taking off from Oslo Airport Gardermoen for a flight to Incheon International Airport, Seoul, Republic of Korea. During take-off run, the aircraft started to autorotate at approximately 120 Knots Calibrated Air Speed (KCAS) due to the actual Centre of Gravity (CG) being aft of the aft CG limit. The stabilizer remained steady as the aircraft continued to accelerate and became airborne at 165 KCAS and 11.5 degrees pitch attitude. After lift-off the nose attitude was increased to 12 degrees and then to 19 degrees. The Commander realised that the aircraft balance was wrong due to the far forward trim setting. The crew suspected a wrong CG location and contacted the company office through SATCOM. The crew was informed that the CG was out of limits for landing. A new CG location was received and the flight crew relocated some load pallets during flight. However, the CG was still aft of the aft limit.
During the approach briefing, the landing configuration and performance parameters were discussed to reduce the possibility of a tail strike during touchdown and landing rollout. Emergency equipment was requested to stand by. During the landing rollout at RKSI, the aircraft nose lifted at 60 kts and nose wheel steering was lost. The Commander stopped the aircraft on the runway and shut down all engines.
The aircraft was subsequently towed to the parking stand. The wrong CG location was caused by a mistake during loading. During load planning the Load Master mistook the Standard Operating Mass (SOM) Centre of Gravity (CG) Mean Aerodynamic Chord (MAC) percent number for the Index Unit (IU) number. Hence the aircraft was misloaded to a CG of 37.8% MAC, which was 4.8 % aft of the aft limit of 33 % MAC. The mistake was not discovered by the Load Master, SAS Cargo or Korean Air Supervisor. Nor was the mistake discovered by the Commander who accepted and signed the cargo loading manifest before take-off.
The aircraft took off from Oslo International Airport with the CG 4.8 % aft of the aft limit and landed at Incheon International Airport with the CG 7.2% aft of the certified aft limit. The landing incident was investigated by the Korean Accident Investigation Board (KAIB) after the aircraft landed at RKSI."
Related Articles

Loss of Control

Further Reading

For further information on this accident, see the full AIBN Serious Incident Report