MD11, en-route, Atlantic Ocean near Halifax Canada, 1998











  MD11, en-route, Atlantic Ocean near Halifax Canada, 1998









Summary

On 2 September 1998, an MD-11 aircraft belonging to Swissair, crashed into the sea off Nova Scotia following an in-flight electrical fire.




Event Details

When

02/09/1998



Event Type


AW,
              FIRE,
              LOC




Day/Night

Night



Flight Conditions

IMC







Flight Details

Aircraft


 

MCDONNELL DOUGLAS MD-11









Operator

Swissair



Type of Flight

Public Transport (Passenger)



Flight Origin




New York/John F Kennedy International Airport







Intended Destination




Geneva Cointrin International Airport







Take-off Commenced

Yes



Flight Airborne

Yes



Flight Completed

No



Phase of Flight

Cruise








Location








General

Tag(s)


              Inadequate Airworthiness Procedures,
              Ineffective Regulatory Oversight
          




FIRE

Tag(s)


              Fire-Electrical origin
          




LOC

Tag(s)


              Significant Systems or Systems Control Failure
          




EPR

Tag(s)


              PAN declaration,
              “Emergency” declaration
          




CS

Tag(s)


              Cabin furnishings fire,
              IFE fire,
              Cabin air contamination
          




AW

System(s)


              Electrical Power
          



Contributor(s)


              OEM Design fault
          




Outcome

Damage or injury

Yes



Aircraft damage

Hull loss



Non-aircraft damage

No



Non-occupant Casualties

No



Occupant Fatalities

Most or all occupants



Off Airport Landing

No



Ditching

No




Causal Factor Group(s)

Group(s)

Aircraft Technical




Safety Recommendation(s)

Group(s)

Aircraft Airworthiness




Investigation Type

Type

Independent










Description
On 2 September 1998, an MD-11 aircraft belonging to Swissair, crashed into the sea off Nova Scotia following an in-flight electrical fire.
In-Flight Fire
Fire in the air is one of the most hazardous situations that a flight crew can be faced with. Without aggressive intervention by the flight crew, a fire on board an aircraft can lead to the catastrophic loss of that aircraft within a very short space of time. Once a fire has become established, it is unlikely that the crew will be able to extinguish it. For further information, see the main article Fire in the Air
Synopsis
This is the synopsis of the official report into the accident published by the Transport Safety Board (TSB) (Canada):
"On 2 September 1998, Swissair Flight 111 departed New York, United States of America, at 2018 eastern daylight savings time on a scheduled flight to Geneva, Switzerland, with 215 passengers and 14 crew members on board. About 53 minutes after departure, while cruising at flight level 330, the flight crew smelled an abnormal odour in the cockpit. Their attention was then drawn to an unspecified area behind and above them and they began to investigate the source. Whatever they saw initially was shortly thereafter no longer perceived to be visible. They agreed that the origin of the anomaly was the air conditioning system. When they assessed that what they had seen or were now seeing was definitely smoke, they decided to divert. They initially began a turn toward Boston; however, when air traffic services mentioned Halifax, Nova Scotia, as an alternative airport, they changed the destination to the Halifax International Airport. While the flight crew was preparing for the landing in Halifax, they were unaware that a fire was spreading above the ceiling in the front area of the aircraft. About 13 minutes after the abnormal odour was detected, the aircraft's flight data recorder began to record a rapid succession of aircraft systems-related failures. The flight crew declared an emergency and indicated a need to land immediately. About one minute later, radio communications and secondary radar contact with the aircraft were lost, and the flight recorders stopped functioning. About five and one-half minutes later, the aircraft crashed into the ocean about five nautical miles southwest of Peggy's Cove, Nova Scotia, Canada. The aircraft was destroyed and there were no survivors."
Related Articles

Airworthiness
In-Flight Fire: Guidance for Flight Crews
Loss of Control

Further Reading
For further information:

TSB Canada report on Swissair Flight 111 (Report Number A98H0003) (Note: This file is 32Mb)
FAA "Lessons Learned from Transport Airplane Accidents": Swissair Flight 111, MD-11
Flight Safety Foundation (FSF) (FSF) Accident Prevention, Mar 2004, “Electrical Arc Identified as Likely Source of In-Flight Fire Aboard Swissair MD-11”