DH8D, vicinity Southampton UK, 2009











  DH8D, vicinity Southampton UK, 2009









Summary

On 3 March 2009, a DHC8-Q400 being operated by UK Regional airline Flybe on a scheduled passenger flight from Edinburgh to Southampton was making its approach at the planned destination in night IMC and moderate turbulence when the aircraft was allowed to loose airspeed to below its minimum manoeuvring speed and a momentary stick shaker activation occurred. The associated automatic disconnection of the autopilot was followed by extreme pitch up and excessive roll left before the flight crew regained full control of the aircraft.




Event Details

When

03/03/2009



Event Type


HF,
              LOC




Day/Night

Night



Flight Conditions

IMC







Flight Details

Aircraft


 

BOMBARDIER Dash 8 Q400









Operator

Flybe



Type of Flight

Public Transport (Passenger)



Flight Origin




Edinburgh Airport







Intended Destination




Southampton Airport







Take-off Commenced

Yes



Flight Airborne

Yes



Flight Completed

Yes



Phase of Flight

Descent








Location








Location - Airport

Airport

EGHI




General

Tag(s)


              Event reporting non compliant
          




HF

Tag(s)


              Ineffective Monitoring
          




LOC

Tag(s)


              Aircraft Flight Path Control Error,
              Temporary Control Loss,
              Extreme Bank,
              Extreme Pitch
          




Outcome

Damage or injury

Yes



Non-aircraft damage

Yes



Non-occupant Casualties

No



Off Airport Landing

Yes



Ditching

Yes




Causal Factor Group(s)

Group(s)

Aircraft Operation




Safety Recommendation(s)

Group(s)

None Made




Investigation Type

Type

Independent









Description
On 3 March 2009, a DHC8-Q400 being operated by UK Regional airline Flybe on a scheduled passenger flight from Edinburgh to Southampton was making its approach at the planned destination in night Instrument Meteorological Conditions (IMC) and moderate turbulence when the aircraft was allowed to loose airspeed to below its minimum manoeuvring speed and a momentary stick shaker activation occurred. The associated automatic disconnection of the autopilot was followed by extreme pitch up and excessive roll left before the flight crew regained full control of the aircraft.
Investigation
The event was not reported by the flight crew to anybody and only became known to the Operator three days later as a result of their Flight Data Monitoring Programme. Operator response was limited to a request to the aircraft commander to raise a Mandatory Occurrence Report (MOR), which was not received by the National Aviation Authority (NAA) until over three weeks after the event. The UK AAIB noted the MOR and determined that a Field Investigation by their organisation was required.
The investigation found that the stall warning had occurred whilst turning left in a slow descent just above 4000 ft QNH and under radar control with the Autopilot engaged in HDG and VS modes. With the trailing edge flaps still set to 0°, airspeed had fallen below the minimum for that condition. The response of the co pilot, who was PF, to the stick shaker activation and the abnormal aircraft attitudes which followed was found to have been slow and her recovery action not in accordance with Operator SOPs.
The underlying issue relating to the occurrence of the stall warning was the process for adjusting aircraft reference IAS on this aircraft type to account for icing conditions, the same issue that had been associated with the activation of stall protection during the fatal accident to an aircraft of the same type in the USA a few weeks earlier. See DH8D, vicinity Buffalo NY USA, 2009
The AAIB Investigation concluded that the flight crew "did not operate effectively, either individually or as a crew, in that they first allowed the aircraft to reach an undesirable situation and then did not deal with the situation in an entirely appropriate manner."
As a result of the Investigation, a comprehensive response was initiated by the Operator and deemed satisfactory by the NAA.
The Report of the Investigation was published on 10 June 2010 and may be seen at SKYbrary bookshelf: AAIB Bulletin: 6/2010 EW/C2009/03/03
No Safety Recommendations were made.
Further Reading

Loss of Control
Bank Angle Awareness
Recovery from Unusual Aircraft Attitudes
Crew Resource Management
CRM Skills Training (OGHFA BN)