LJ24, vicinity Belleville Illinois USA, 2003











  LJ24, vicinity Belleville Illinois USA, 2003









Summary

On November 12, 2003, a Bombardier Learjet 24D being operated on a non scheduled flight by Multi-Aero Inc. was destroyed during a forced landing and post crash fire following a loss of power in both engines after an encounter with a flock of birds just after take off from St. Louis Downtown Airport.




Event Details

When

12/11/2003



Event Type


BS,
              FIRE,
              LOC




Day/Night

Day



Flight Conditions

VMC







Flight Details

Aircraft


 

LEAR JET Learjet 24









Operator

Multi Aero Corporation



Type of Flight

Public Transport (Passenger)



Flight Origin




St. Louis Downtown Airport







Intended Destination




North Platte







Take-off Commenced

Yes



Flight Airborne

Yes



Flight Completed

No



Phase of Flight

Climb








Location








Location - Airport

Airport

KCPS




BS

Tag(s)


              Flocking Birds,
              Engine Ingestion
          




FIRE

Tag(s)


              Post Crash Fire
          




LOC

Tag(s)


              Loss of Engine Power,
              Environmental Factors,
              Bird or Animal Strike
          




Outcome

Damage or injury

Yes



Aircraft damage

Hull loss



Non-aircraft damage

Yes



Non-occupant Casualties

No



Occupant Injuries

Few occupants



Off Airport Landing

Yes



Ditching

No




Causal Factor Group(s)

Group(s)

Aircraft Operation




Safety Recommendation(s)

Group(s)

None Made




Investigation Type

Type

Independent









Description
On November 12, 2003, a Bombardier Learjet 24D being operated on a non scheduled flight by Multi-Aero Inc. was destroyed during a forced landing and post crash fire following a loss of power in both engines after an encounter with a flock of birds just after take off from St. Louis Downtown Airport. Subsequent circumstantial evidence suggested that a flock of European Starlings might have been present. The flight had departed in accordance with a remotely issued take off clearance prior to the local ATC TWR opening.
The flight crew reported being unable to maintain altitude or attempt engine relight with the residual thrust available and a forced landing was made in which the aircraft contacted the terrain on the downward side of a shallow sloping hill located about three miles from the departure airport. It was destroyed by the impact and a post-crash fire during which most of the cabin and tailcone were burned out. The center section of the fuel tank remained structurally intact, although damaged by impact forces. All three landing gear legs were still attached to the aircraft and found in the retracted position.
The nose of the aircraft remained intact, but the flight deck received extensive fire and heat damage. Both windshields were melted and the upper skin was consumed. The outboard section of the left wing had separated from the aircraft about 4-5 feet outboard of the fuselage The right wing remained attached to the forward fuselage section. The outboard section of the wing remained attached to the inboard wing section, but it was broken about mid-span and it was partially consumed by fire.
All onboard escaped with minor or no injuries.
The Investigation
In their Report issued in January 2006, the National Transportation Safety Board (USA) (NTSB) determined that the probable cause of the accident was “The total loss of power to the right engine and the partial loss of power to the left engine after the airplane encountered a flock of birds during initial climb out, resulting in impeded ram induction airflow”.
Related Articles

Bird Strike
Operators Checklist for Bird Strike Hazard Management
Aircraft Certification for Bird Strike Risk
Airport Bird Hazard Management
Other Investigations into Accidents & Serious Incidents following Bird Strikes

Further Reading

For further information see the NTSB Report CHI04FA029