L188, vicinity Stansted UK, 2007











  L188, vicinity Stansted UK, 2007









Summary

On 19 March 2007, shortly after take off from Stansted UK, the crew of a Lockheed Electra Freighter being operated by Atlantic Airways experienced control difficulties and power fluctuation on all engines, subsequently attributed to a malfunctioning propeller synchrophaser. The flight crew were unclear what was occurring and proceeded to shut down one engine and believed that the others were at risk of failure during a return to land.




Event Details

When

19/03/2007



Event Type


AW,
              HF,
              LOC




Day/Night

Night



Flight Conditions

VMC







Flight Details

Aircraft


 

LOCKHEED Electra









Operator

Atlantic Airways



Type of Flight

Public Transport (Cargo)



Flight Origin




London Stansted Airport







Intended Destination




Edinburgh Airport







Actual Destination




London Stansted Airport







Take-off Commenced

Yes



Flight Airborne

Yes



Flight Completed

Yes



Phase of Flight

Climb








Location








Location - Airport

Airport

EGSS




General

Tag(s)


              Inadequate Aircraft Operator Procedures
          




HF

Tag(s)


              Inappropriate crew response (technical fault)
          




LOC

Tag(s)


              Significant Systems or Systems Control Failure,
              Loss of Engine Power,
              Temporary Control Loss
          




EPR

Tag(s)


              PAN declaration
          




AW

System(s)


              Engine Fuel and Control
          



Contributor(s)


              Component Fault in service
          




Outcome

Damage or injury

No



Aircraft damage

None



Non-aircraft damage

No



Non-occupant Casualties

No



Occupant Injuries

None



Occupant Fatalities

None



Off Airport Landing

No



Ditching

No




Causal Factor Group(s)

Group(s)

Aircraft Technical




Investigation Type

Type

Independent









Description
On 19 March 2007, shortly after a night take off from Stansted UK and in Visual Meteorological Conditions (VMC), the crew of a Lockheed Electra Freighter being operated by Atlantic Airways experienced control difficulties because of power fluctuation on all engines which were subsequently attributed to a malfunctioning propeller synchrophaser. The flight crew were unclear at the time what was occurring and proceeded to shut down one engine and believed that the others were at risk of failure during a return to land.
Synopsis
This is an extract from the report published by the Aircraft Accident Investigation Branch (UK) (AAIB), UK:
"Immediately after takeoff on a night flight from Stansted to Edinburgh, the flight crew experienced control difficulties and fluctuation of the rpm and power on all four engines. As the aircraft climbed towards 3,000 ft above mean sea level (QNH) the No 2 engine was observed to be running down. The crew shut the engine down, declared a PAN and prepared to return to Stansted. The remaining three engines continued to suffer from fluctuating parameters throughout the rest of the flight until, when on final approach with landing flap selected, both the No 1 and No 3 engines appeared to run down. The aircraft landed using only the No 4 engine. The investigation revealed that the incident was the result of a failure of the propeller synchrophaser."
Related Articles
LOC

Loss of Control

Further Reading
For further information see the full Report published by the AAIB (UK).