C185, Smithers BC Canada, 2000











  C185, Smithers BC Canada, 2000









Summary

On 27 September 2000, a Cessna 185, struck a snow covered hillside, probably while in controlled flight, en-route from Smithers BC, Canada.




Event Details

When

27/09/2000



Event Type


CFIT




Day/Night

Day



Flight Conditions

IMC







Flight Details

Aircraft


 

CESSNA 185 Skywagon









Operator

Not Recorded



Type of Flight

Private



Flight Origin




Smithers Airport







Intended Destination




Whitehorse/Erik Nielsen International Airport







Take-off Commenced

Yes



Flight Airborne

Yes



Flight Completed

No



Phase of Flight

Cruise








Location

Approx.

80 nm NW of Smithers










CFIT

Tag(s)


              Into terrain,
              No Visual Reference,
              VFR flight plan
          




Outcome

Damage or injury

Yes



Aircraft damage

Hull loss



Non-aircraft damage

Yes



Non-occupant Casualties

No



Occupant Fatalities

Most or all occupants



Off Airport Landing

Yes



Ditching

Yes




Causal Factor Group(s)

Group(s)

Aircraft Operation




Safety Recommendation(s)

Group(s)

None Made




Investigation Type

Type

Independent









Description
On 27 September 2000, a privately operated Cessna 185 with three occupants, struck a snow covered hillside, en-route from Smithers BC to White Horse, Yukon, Canada.
Synopsis
The following is an extract taken from the Summary from the Transport Safety Board (Canada) Aviation Investigation Report:
"The Cessna 185 aircraft…was purchased in Spokane, Washington, USA, on 27 September 2000 and test flown by the pilot that day. The vendor certified that all of the required maintenance was accomplished before selling the aeroplane. The next day the pilot departed Deer Park (north of Spokane), on a ferry flight to Alaska. At about 1200 Pacific daylight time, the aeroplane landed in Smithers, British Columbia, after a flight from Williams Lake. The pilot had the aeroplane refuelled, received a weather briefing, and filed a flight plan. The flight-planned route was from Smithers direct to Dease Lake, then direct to Whitehorse, Yukon. At 1217, the pilot and two passengers departed Smithers. At 1317, the Cospas-Sarsat system,(1) received an emergency locator transmitter signal from an area about 80 nautical miles northwest of Smithers. Search-and-rescue aircraft were dispatched; however, weather conditions hampered the search. The wreckage of the Cessna 185 was found at 1310 the next day at 5100 feet above sea level on a snow-covered, treeless hillside, at latitude 56°08' north and longitude 128°16' west. No fire had occurred. The three occupants were fatally injured."
The full TSB report of the Investigation was published on 24 May 2001 and concluded that:
"The aeroplane struck a hillside, probably while in controlled flight, for undetermined reasons…It is probable that the pilot continued visual flight in adverse weather conditions, which increased the risk of collision with terrain."
No Safety Recommendations were made.
Related Articles

Controlled Flight Into Terrain (CFIT)

Further Reading

The full TSB report
Accident and Serious Incident Reports: CFIT contains details of other accidents and incidents which resulted in, or might have resulted in, a CFIT