B752, en-route, North Sea, 2006











  B752, en-route, North Sea, 2006









Summary

On 22 October 2006 a blue haze was observed in the passenger cabin of a Boeing 757-200, operated by Thomsonfly, shortly after reaching cruise altitude on a scheduled passenger flight from Newcastle to Larnaca. A precautionary diversion was made to London Stansted, where an emergency evacuation was carried out successfully.




Event Details

When

22/10/2006



Event Type


AW,
              FIRE




Day/Night

Day



Flight Conditions

Not Recorded







Flight Details

Aircraft


 

BOEING 757-200









Operator

Thomsonfly



Type of Flight

Public Transport (Passenger)



Flight Origin




Newcastle Airport







Intended Destination




Larnaca International Airport







Actual Destination




London Stansted Airport







Take-off Commenced

Yes



Flight Airborne

Yes



Flight Completed

Yes



Phase of Flight

Cruise








Location

Approx.

100 NW SE from London Stansted










FIRE

Tag(s)


              Non-Fire Fumes
          




EPR

Tag(s)


              Emergency Evacuation,
              MAYDAY declaration,
              PAN declaration,
              RFFS Procedures
          




CS

Tag(s)


              Evacuation slides deployed,
              Cabin air contamination,
              Flight Crew Evacuation Command
          




AW

System(s)


              Engine - General,
              Bleed Air
          



Contributor(s)


              Component Fault in service
          




Outcome

Damage or injury

Yes



Aircraft damage

Minor



Non-aircraft damage

Yes



Non-occupant Casualties

No



Occupant Injuries

None



Occupant Fatalities

None



Off Airport Landing

Yes



Ditching

Yes




Causal Factor Group(s)

Group(s)

Aircraft Technical




Safety Recommendation(s)

Group(s)

Aircraft Operation
Aircraft Airworthiness




Investigation Type

Type

Independent









Description
On 22 October 2006 a blue haze was observed in the passenger cabin of a Boeing 757-200 being operated by Thomsonfly shortly after it reached cruise altitude on a scheduled passenger flight from Newcastle to Larnaca. A precautionary diversion was made to London Stansted, where an emergency evacuation was carried out successfully.
Synopsis
The following is an extract from the UK AAIB report on the Serious Incident:
[…] "Approximately five minutes after reaching its cruising level of FL 370 over the North Sea, the cabin manager (CM) contacted the flight crew via interphone to report a “haze” and an unusual smell in the cabin. She commented that the haze seemed worse in the rear of the cabin, but could not smell anything from her position at the front galley. On inspecting the cabin the commander saw a fine blue-grey haze, but could not detect any unusual smells. He returned to the flight deck, having requested that the CM report any change. She contacted him again shortly afterwards to advise that the smoke was getting worse.
The commander instructed the co-pilot to declare a ‘PAN’ to Maastricht ATC, with whom they were already in contact, to request a descent and direct routing to Stansted, approximately 100 nm distant. The CM then entered the flight deck to be briefed.
Having established the aircraft in a descent, the pilots commenced the Quick Reference Handbook (QRH) ‘SMOKE OR FUMES - AIR CONDITIONING’ checklist. The first item on the checklist related to the use of oxygen masks and smoke goggles; these were not used initially, as no fumes could be detected on the flight deck at this time. In accordance with the operator’s training, but not specified in the QRH procedure, the pilots paused for a few minutes between specific checklist items, to determine if the actions taken had been effective. When this checklist was complete the flight crew actioned the ‘SMOKE OR FUMES REMOVAL’ QRH procedure.
Whilst descending through FL200 the aircraft was handed over to the London Terminal Control Centre (LTCC). The CM advised the flight crew that the haze appeared to be worsening and that some passengers were starting to feel unwell. Fumes were then detected on the flight deck, which prompted the pilots to don oxygen masks and declare a ‘MAYDAY’. LTCC gave immediate clearance for a further descent and provided radar vectors to position the aircraft for an 8 nm final for Runway 23 at Stansted."[…]
The aircraft was evacuated on the taxiway without further incident. One cabin crew member initially had difficulty in opening the rear cabin doors, due to insufficient force being used.
The Investigation
"The blue haze could not be reproduced on initial investigation, which included engine ground runs. A planned post-maintenance proving flight was aborted during the takeoff roll when smoke entered the flight deck and cabin. Further investigation, which included ground runs at higher engine power settings, identified the source of the smoke to be the No 2 (right) engine.

The cause was determined to be a fractured No 1 bearing floating seal ring, which had allowed engine oil to leak into the compressor airflow path and to be ingested into the bleed air system, which provides air to the cabin air conditioning system."

Two Safety Recommendations are made.

"It is recommended that the Boeing Commercial Airplane Company consider revising the procedures in the Boeing 757 Fault Isolation Manual to introduce a requirement for ground running at higher engine power settings, if initial testing fails to identify the source of smoke or fumes in conditioned air.
It is recommended that the European Aviation Safety Agency ensure that effective measures are in place for cabin crews to become, and remain familiar with, the different opening procedures and characteristics of aircraft exits in both normal and emergency modes of operation."

Related Articles

Fire in the Air
Engine Fire Protection
Smoke Gases
Aircraft Fire Detection Systems
Aircraft Fire Extinguishing Systems
Passenger Cabin Fire

Further Reading

AAIB Bulletin: 6/2009 (EW/C2006/10/08)