S61, vicinity Bournemouth UK, 2002











  S61, vicinity Bournemouth UK, 2002









Summary

On 15 July 2002, a Sikorsky S-61 helicopter operated by Bristow suffered a catastrophic engine failure and fire. After an emergency landing and evacuation, the aircraft was destroyed by an intense fire.




Event Details

When

15/07/2002



Event Type


AW,
              FIRE




Day/Night

Day



Flight Conditions

VMC







Flight Details

Aircraft


 

SIKORSKY S-61









Operator

Bristow Helicopters



Type of Flight

Aerial Work



Flight Origin




RNAS Portland Heliport







Intended Destination




RNAS Portland Heliport







Take-off Commenced

Yes



Flight Airborne

Yes



Flight Completed

No



Phase of Flight

Cruise








Location








Location - Airport

Airport

EGHH




FIRE

Tag(s)


              Fire-Power Plant origin
          




AW

System(s)


              Engine - General
          



Contributor(s)


              Component Fault in service
          




Outcome

Damage or injury

Yes



Aircraft damage

Hull loss



Non-aircraft damage

Yes



Non-occupant Casualties

No



Occupant Injuries

None



Occupant Fatalities

None



Off Airport Landing

Yes



Ditching

No




Causal Factor Group(s)

Group(s)

Aircraft Technical




Safety Recommendation(s)

Group(s)

Aircraft Airworthiness




Investigation Type

Type

Independent









Description
On 15 July 2002, a Sikorsky S-61 helicopter operated by Bristow suffered a catastrophic engine failure and fire. After an emergency landing and evacuation, the aircraft was destroyed by an intense fire.
Synopsis
The following is an extract from the synopsis is taken from the official Aircraft Accident Investigation Branch (UK) (AAIB) accident report:
"G-BBHM, which was based at Portland, was being operated in the Search and Rescue role. Following the first alert of the day, G-BBHM had been airborne for about 40 minutes over Poole Harbour when the two rear crew members became aware of an unusual noise. Almost immediately, the pilots saw the ‘NO 2 ENG FIRE WARN’ light illuminate accompanied by the audio alert. The pilots commenced their emergency procedures, including shutting down the No 2 engine and activating the fire extinguisher, and initially set heading for Bournemouth Airport. However, with the ‘FIRE’ light still illuminated and indications of hydraulic failures from both tactile and warning systems, the co-pilot alerted the commander to a suitable nearby landing area. The commander called for an immediate landing and made a successful approach and touchdown; during the approach, the pilots became aware that ‘NO 1 ENG FIRE WARN’ was also illuminated. After touchdown, the pilots shut down the No 1 engine and the crew quickly vacated the helicopter. G-BBHM was destroyed by fire shortly after they were clear. The time between the onset of the original fire warning and touchdown was 82 seconds."
The investigation identified the following causal factors:

"The No 2 engine had suffered rapid deterioration of the No 5 (location) bearing of the free turbine, causing failure of the adjacent carbon oil seal and mechanical interference between the Main Drive Shaft Thomas coupling and the Engine Mounting Rear Support Assembly tube, which completely severed the support tube.
A severe fire, outside of the engine fire zone, was caused because the released engine oil was ignited either by this mechanical interference, or by contact with the hot engine exhaust duct.
The No 2 engine’s No 5 bearing failed because of unusual and excessive cyclic loading conditions arising from shaft vibration. The bearing deterioration was exacerbated by a reduction in its oil supply during the same period, when the live oil jet fractured as a consequence of the vibration.
It is probable that the Main Drive Shaft vibration was caused by damage or distortion sustained during one or more previous No 2 engine starts involving a high torque rotor engagement.
There was no specific torque limitation published in the manufacturer’s Flight Manual, used by Bristow Helicopters Limited, during rotor engagement after engine start."

Related Articles

Airworthiness
Fire in the Air

Further Reading

For further information, see the full AAIB Accident Report 2/2004 (5 MB)