LJ35, vicinity Masset BC Canada, 1995











  LJ35, vicinity Masset BC Canada, 1995









Summary

On 11 January 1995, a Learjet 35 on a medical positioning flight and carrying a medical team crashed into the sea while conducting an NDB approach to Masset, British Columbia, Canada. The most probable cause was considered to be a miss-set altimeter.




Event Details

When

11/01/1995



Event Type


CFIT,
              HF




Day/Night

Night



Flight Conditions

Not Recorded







Flight Details

Aircraft


 

GATES LEARJET Learjet 35









Operator

Canada Jet Charters



Type of Flight

Public Transport (Non Revenue)



Flight Origin




Vancouver International Airport







Intended Destination




Masset Airport







Take-off Commenced

Yes



Flight Airborne

Yes



Flight Completed

No



Phase of Flight

Descent








Location








Location - Airport

Airport

CZMT




General

Tag(s)


              Non Precision Approach,
              Altimeter Setting Error
          




CFIT

Tag(s)


              Into water,
              IFR flight plan
          




HF

Tag(s)


              Data use error,
              Ineffective Monitoring,
              Violation
          




Outcome

Damage or injury

Yes



Aircraft damage

Hull loss



Non-aircraft damage

No



Non-occupant Casualties

No



Occupant Fatalities

Most or all occupants



Off Airport Landing

No



Ditching

No




Causal Factor Group(s)

Group(s)

Aircraft Operation




Safety Recommendation(s)

Group(s)

None Made




Investigation Type

Type

Independent









Description
On 11 January 1995, a GATES LEARJET Learjet 35, crashed into the sea while on a medical positioning flight and carrying a medical team conducting during an Non-Directional Beacon approach to Masset, British Columbia, Canada. The most probable cause was considered to be a miss-set altimeter.
Synopsis
The following is the synopsis from the official report into the accident produced by the Transport Safety Board (Canada):
"The Learjet 35 departed Vancouver International Airport, British Columbia, at 0035 Pacific standard time, on a one-hour medical evacuation flight to the Masset aerodrome in the Queen Charlotte Islands. On board the aircraft were two pilots and a medical team of three persons. During the instrument approach to runway 12 at Masset, the aircraft crashed into the ocean, eight nautical miles northwest of the Masset aerodrome. Intense Canadian military search and rescue operations, coupled with extensive civilian underwater searching, resulted in finding the aircraft wreckage and the bodies of two of the occupants; the other three occupants are presumed to have also perished in the accident. The aircraft was destroyed.
The Board determined that the crew most likely conducted the instrument approach with reference to an unintentionally miss-set altimeter of 30.17 in-Hg (≈ 1021.68 mbar), and unknowingly flew the aircraft into the water. The circumstances leading to the incorrect altimeter setting could not be determined, nor was it determined why the crew did not detect the miss-set altimeter."
Related Articles

Controlled Flight Into Terrain (CFIT)

Further Reading

For more information, see the full TSB report