B763, en-route, Atlantic Ocean, 2008











  B763, en-route, Atlantic Ocean, 2008









Summary

On 28 January 2008, the first officer on a B767, flying from Toronto to London, became incapacitated and the captain elected to divert to the nearest airport, Shannon, Ireland.




Event Details

When

28/01/2008



Event Type


HF




Day/Night

Night



Flight Conditions

Not Recorded







Flight Details

Aircraft


 

BOEING 767-300ER









Operator

Not Recorded



Type of Flight

Public Transport (Passenger)



Flight Origin




Toronto/Lester B. Pearson International Airport







Intended Destination




London Heathrow Airport







Actual Destination




Shannon Airport







Take-off Commenced

Yes



Flight Airborne

Yes



Flight Completed

Yes



Phase of Flight

Cruise








Location

Approx.

Oceanic Reporting Point MALOT










HF

Tag(s)


              Flight Crew Incapacitation
          




EPR

Tag(s)


              PAN declaration
          




Outcome

Damage or injury

Yes



Aircraft damage

None



Non-aircraft damage

Yes



Non-occupant Casualties

No



Occupant Injuries

None



Occupant Fatalities

None



Off Airport Landing

Yes



Ditching

Yes




Causal Factor Group(s)

Group(s)

Aircraft Operation




Safety Recommendation(s)

Group(s)

None Made




Investigation Type

Type

Independent









Description
On 28 January 2008, the first officer on a B767 Series, flying from Toronto to London, became incapacitated and the captain elected to divert to the nearest airport, Shannon, Ireland.
Synopsis
The following is an extract from the official AAIU (Ireland) report into the event:
"...When the First Officer reported for duty he was undoubtedly under considerable pressure, reporting after [his] positioning flight later than planned. The Commander however had the situation very much in hand with the flight planning and pre-flight duties taken care of. On his arrival on the flight deck, he made this known to his First Officer and set a good tone prior to commencing the flight. During the cruise the Commander became aware all was not well with his colleague. He suggested he take a break, not only for his immediate well-being, but considering the high workload in London airspace and expected Autoland approach. The situation continued to deteriorate and it soon became apparent that the First Officer was quite ill. For his own well-being and the safety of the aircraft, the most appropriate course of action was to stand him down from duty and seek medical attention which was available on board. The decision to divert to the nearest suitable Aerodrome was prudent."
The first officer was kept in hospital in Ireland for 11 days before returning to Canada on an aeromedical evacuation flight.
Related Articles

Human Factors
Pilot Incapacitation

Further Reading

For further information, see the full AAIU report