A320, en-route, Sydney Australia, 2007











  A320, en-route, Sydney Australia, 2007









Summary

On 11 January 2007, an Air New Zealand Airbus A320 which had just departed Sydney Australia for Auckland, New Zealand was observed to have turned onto a heading contrary to the ATC-issued radar heading. When so advised by ATC, the crew checked the aircraft compasses and found that they were reading approximately 40 degrees off the correct heading.




Event Details

When

11/01/2007



Event Type


AW,
              HF,
              LOS




Day/Night

Day



Flight Conditions

VMC







Flight Details

Aircraft


 

AIRBUS A-320









Operator

Air New Zealand



Type of Flight

Public Transport (Passenger)



Flight Origin




Sydney Airport







Intended Destination




Auckland Airport







Actual Destination




Sydney Airport







Take-off Commenced

Yes



Flight Airborne

Yes



Flight Completed

Yes



Phase of Flight

Cruise








Location








HF

Tag(s)


              Data use error,
              Distraction,
              Ineffective Monitoring,
              Procedural non compliance
          




LOS

Tag(s)


              Accepted ATC Clearance not followed,
              Lateral Navigation Error
          




AW

System(s)


              Navigation
          



Contributor(s)


              Maintenance Error (valid guidance available)
          




Outcome

Damage or injury

No



Non-aircraft damage

No



Non-occupant Casualties

No



Off Airport Landing

No



Ditching

No




Causal Factor Group(s)

Group(s)

Aircraft Operation
Aircraft Technical




Safety Recommendation(s)

Group(s)

None Made




Investigation Type

Type

Independent









Description
On 11 January 2007, an Air New Zealand Airbus A320 which had just departed Sydney Australia for Auckland, New Zealand on the first flight of the day was observed to have turned onto a heading contrary to the ATC-issued radar heading. When so advised by ATC, the crew checked the aircraft compasses and found that they were reading approximately 40 degrees off the correct heading and that a ‘GPS PRIMARY LOST’ message had appeared on the MFD and the NDs.
“The crew then advised ATC that they had navigational difficulties and elected to return to Sydney for landing. When the aircraft returned to the departure gate, the flight crew noticed that the inertial reference system (IRS) had been aligned to the incorrect longitude. The operator subsequently found that the IRS had been aligned by maintenance staff prior to the crew boarding the aircraft. The incorrect alignment of the IRS was not detected during a number of subsequent checks prior to departure".
The ATSB Investigation Report was published in April 2008 and found that:

There was no aircraft systems anomaly that might have contributed to the development of the occurrence.
Maintenance personnel had inadvertently entered incorrect position information in the aircraft inertial reference system (IRS) prior to release to service for the incident flight.
The incorrect position data in the IRS remained undetected by the flight crew, despite four separate pre-take-off procedural defences where position verification should have occurred.

Related Articles

See details of another 2007 occurrence, this time to a Boeing 737-500 which also arose following departure with an incorrect IRS position entered.

Further Reading

For further information, see the full ATSB Report 200700065