P46T, vicinity Son Bonet Palma de Mallorca Spain, 2002











  P46T, vicinity Son Bonet Palma de Mallorca Spain, 2002









Summary

On 19 December 2002, a Piper PA-46 Malibu, after takeoff from Son Bonet Aerodrome, penetrated the control zone (CTR) of Palma de Mallorca tower. The pilot was instructed to leave the CTR and the aircraft headed towards mountainous terrain to the north of the island where the flight conditions were below the VFR minimum. In level flight the aircraft impacted terrain at an altitude of 2000 ft killing all three occupants.




Event Details

When

19/12/2002



Event Type


AI,
              CFIT,
              HF




Day/Night

Day



Flight Conditions

IMC







Flight Details

Aircraft


 

PIPER PA-46-500TP Malibu Meridian









Operator

Private



Type of Flight

Private



Flight Origin




Son Bonet Aerodrome







Intended Destination




Sabadell Airport







Take-off Commenced

Yes



Flight Airborne

Yes



Flight Completed

No



Phase of Flight

Cruise








Location








Location - Airport

Airport

LESB




AI

Tag(s)


              CA Incursion
          




CFIT

Tag(s)


              Into terrain,
              No Visual Reference,
              VFR flight plan
          




HF

Tag(s)


              Distraction,
              Ineffective Monitoring,
              Manual Handling,
              Spatial Disorientation
          




Outcome

Damage or injury

Yes



Aircraft damage

Hull loss



Non-aircraft damage

No



Non-occupant Casualties

No



Occupant Fatalities

Most or all occupants



Number of Occupant Fatalities

3



Off Airport Landing

No



Ditching

No




Causal Factor Group(s)

Group(s)

Aircraft Operation




Safety Recommendation(s)

Group(s)

None Made




Investigation Type

Type

Independent









Description
On 19 December 2002, a Piper PA-46 Malibu, after takeoff from Son Bonet Aerodrome, penetrated the control zone (CTR) of Palma de Mallorca tower. The pilot was instructed to leave the CTR and the aircraft headed towards mountainous terrain to the north of the island where the flight conditions were below the VFR minimum. In level flight the aircraft impacted terrain at an altitude of 2000 ft killing all three occupants.
Synopis
The following is an extract from the official accident Report published by Comisión de Investigación de Accidentes e Incidentes de Aviación Civil (CIAIAC) Spain:
“The weather conditions in Son Bonet were within the limits of Visual Meteorological Conditions (VMC).
After takeoff from Son Bonet, the aircraft penetrated some miles into the takeoff area of runway 06 L and R at Palma de Mallorca and was urgently requested by Control [tower] to head north and leave the area because at that moment a commercial passenger flight was taking off.
The aircraft’s flight continued five or six minutes in a northerly direction, penetrating a mountainous area on the island […]. That day some of the mountain peaks were covered by clouds.
[…] The aircraft in horizontal flight crashed into a steep SE facing mountain cliff.”
Further in the Flight Preparation section, the Report states:
“Before takeoff, the pilot was informed of the weather conditions at his destination and in two alternated aerodromes but the person who attended him was surprised by his self-reliant attitude and the fact that he did not request information on the departure aerodrome because, as he indicated, he was there and could see the weather.
Possibly the flying preparation did not include complete information on VFR procedures, orography and maps of the area, the meteorology [meteorological conditions] in the different TMA departure routes and ATC-transponder […].
The pilot completed a flight plan [FP], which he communicated to Palma Operations via the computer terminal in Son Bonet. The FP did not indicate the route he planned to take.”
According the Report the cause of the accident is given as:

“It is believed that the accident occurred as a result of the marginal VMC conditions which exist in the area where the aircraft was flying under VFR rules.
The aircraft entered this area possibly due to the pilot’s disorientation and inadequate preparation and execution of the flight.”

No Safety Recommendations are given in the Report.
Related Articles

HF - Human Factors, Complacency, Situational Awareness;
CFIT - Controlled Flight Into Terrain (CFIT), Terrain Awareness;
AI - Airspace Infringement, Airspace Infringement and Navigation;

Further Reading
For further information see the full accident report published by CIAIAC Spain.