B722, Hamilton OT Canada 2008











  B722, Hamilton OT Canada 2008









Summary

On 22 July 2008, a Kelowna Flightcraft Air Charter Ltd. Boeing 727-200 was operating a cargo flight from Moncton NB, to Hamilton, OT. After radar vectoring for an approach to Runway 06 at Hamilton, the aircraft touched down hard and bounced before touching down hard a second time. Immediately after the second touchdown, a go-around was initiated. During rotation, the tailskid made contact with the runway. The thrust reverser actuator fairing and the number 2 engine tailpipe made contact with the ground off the departure end of the runway. The aircraft climbed away and then returned for a normal landing on Runway 12. There were no injuries; the aircraft sustained only minor damage.




Event Details

When

22/07/2008



Event Type


HF,
              LOC




Day/Night

Night



Flight Conditions

On Ground - Normal Visibility







Flight Details

Aircraft


 

BOEING 727-200









Operator

Kelowna Flightcraft Air Charter



Type of Flight

Public Transport (Cargo)



Flight Origin




Moncton/Greater Moncton International Airport







Intended Destination




Hamilton/John C. Munro Hamilton International Airport







Take-off Commenced

Yes



Flight Airborne

Yes



Flight Completed

No



Phase of Flight

Missed Approach








Location








Location - Airport

Airport

CYHM




General

Tag(s)


              Non Precision Approach
          




HF

Tag(s)


              Inappropriate crew response - skills deficiency,
              Inappropriate crew response (automatics),
              Ineffective Monitoring,
              Procedural non compliance
          




LOC

Tag(s)


              Temporary Control Loss,
              Hard landing,
              Unintended transitory terrain contact
          




Outcome

Damage or injury

Yes



Aircraft damage

Minor



Non-aircraft damage

Yes



Non-occupant Casualties

No



Occupant Injuries

None



Occupant Fatalities

None



Off Airport Landing

Yes



Ditching

Yes




Causal Factor Group(s)

Group(s)

Aircraft Operation




Safety Recommendation(s)

Group(s)

Aircraft Operation




Investigation Type

Type

Independent









Description
On 22 July 2008, a Kelowna Flightcraft Air Charter Ltd. Boeing 727-200 was operating a cargo flight from Moncton NB, to Hamilton, OT. After radar vectoring for an approach to Runway 06 at Hamilton, the aircraft touched down hard and bounced before touching down hard a second time. Immediately after the second touchdown, a go-around was initiated. During rotation, the tailskid made contact with the runway. The thrust reverser actuator fairing and the number 2 engine tailpipe made contact with the ground off the departure end of the runway. The aircraft climbed away and then returned for a normal landing on Runway 12. There were no injuries; the aircraft sustained only minor damage.
The Investigation
An Investigation was carried out by the Canadian Transportation Safety Board.
Their findings as to Causes and Contributing Factors were as follows:
(1) The go-around was initiated with the spoilers deployed. This resulted in added drag that precluded a safe lift-off and caused the tail and the number 2 engine to strike the ground.
(2) The crew had not received any training for a bounced landing or a go-around after touchdown and therefore did not retract the spoilers.
Their findings as to Risk were as follows:
(1) The bounced landing recovery and go-around procedures do not direct crews to stow the spoilers. In the event of a go-around after touchdown, crews may leave the speedbrake lever in the extended position, increasing the risk of the aircraft not being able to meet the required climb gradient.
(2) Cockpit voice recorder (CVR) information regarding this incident was overwritten. The lack of CVR data hampered investigators’ ability to obtain a timely and complete understanding of the event.
One other Finding of the Investigation was given. This was that “while vertical acceleration was recorded at 1.9 g and 2.3 g, it is likely that the actual g values experienced by the aircraft were higher.”
One Safety Recommendation was made as a result of the Investigation:
“The Department of Transport require air carriers to incorporate bounced landing recovery techniques in their flight manuals and to teach these techniques during initial and recurrent training.”
Related Articles
LOC

Go-around from Low Airspeed/Low Thrust
Flying a Manual Go-around

Further Reading

The TSB Report was published on 6 August 2009 and may be seen in full at /bookshelf/books/830.pdf