CVLT, en-route, Kapiti Coast New Zealand, 2003











  CVLT, en-route, Kapiti Coast New Zealand, 2003









Summary

On 3 October 2003, a Convair 580 on a scheduled night freight flight from Christchurch to Palmerston North, was observed on radar to enter a tightening left turn and disappear while descending through an area of severe icing. The aircraft impacted the sea vertically and at high speed.




Event Details

When

03/10/2003



Event Type


LOC,
              WX




Day/Night

Night



Flight Conditions

IMC







Flight Details

Aircraft


 

CONVAIR CV-580









Operator

Air Freight NZ



Type of Flight

Public Transport (Cargo)



Flight Origin




Christchurch







Intended Destination




Palmerston North International







Take-off Commenced

Yes



Flight Airborne

Yes



Flight Completed

No



Phase of Flight

Cruise








Location

Approx.

about 10 km north of Paraparaumu and about 4 km seaward of the coast










LOC

Tag(s)


              Airframe Structural Failure,
              Environmental Factors,
              Extreme Bank
          




WX

Tag(s)


              In Flight Airframe Icing
          




Outcome

Damage or injury

Yes



Aircraft damage

Hull loss



Non-aircraft damage

Yes



Non-occupant Casualties

No



Occupant Fatalities

Most or all occupants



Off Airport Landing

Yes



Ditching

Yes




Causal Factor Group(s)

Group(s)

Aircraft Operation




Safety Recommendation(s)

Group(s)

Aircraft Operation
Aircraft Airworthiness




Investigation Type

Type

Independent









Description
On 3 October 2003, a Convair 580 on a scheduled night freight flight from Christchurch to Palmerston North, was observed on radar to enter a tightening left turn and disappear while descending through an area of severe icing. The aircraft impacted the sea vertically and at high speed.
Abstract
The following is the abstract from the official Transport Accident Investigation Commission (NZ):
"On Friday 3 October 2003 at 2126, Convair 580 ZK-KFU was on a scheduled night freight flight from Christchurch to Palmerston North, when it was observed on radar to enter a tightening left turn and disappear. Attempts to contact the aircraft were unsuccessful and a search for the aircraft was started. The aircraft had impacted the sea about 10 km north of Paraparaumu about vertically and at high speed. The crew of 2 was killed on impact.
After crossing Cook Strait the aircraft probably became heavily iced up while descending through an area of severe icing, and stalled after flying level for a short time. The crew was unable to recover from the ensuing spiral dive and the aircraft broke up as it descended.
Safety issues identified included:

the need for all pilots and operators to have a better understanding of aircraft icing
the use of air reports to alert pilots to hazardous meteorological conditions
the adequacy of aircraft, operator and CAA documentation to assist pilots encountering adverse weather conditions, particularly for IFR and night freight operators in icing conditions
the adequacy of the installation, performance and capabilities of cockpit voice and flight data recorders
the requirement for a suitable tracking device to be readily available to find underwater location beacons.

Related Articles

In-Flight Icing
Loss of Control

Further Reading

The full TAIC Report No: 03-006: Convair 580, ZK-KFU, loss of control and in-flight break up, Kapiti Coast, 3 October 2003.