AN26, Kassel Germany, 2007











  AN26, Kassel Germany, 2007









Summary

On 4 October 2007, an Antonov An-26B cargo aircraft being operated for an unidentified Hungarian-registered carrier by a Ukrainian crew on an empty positioning flight from Stuttgart to Kassel overran the destination runway during a daylight landing in normal ground visibility. None of the six crew on board were injured. There was no damage to the aircraft but some damage to ground installations.




Event Details

When

04/09/2007



Event Type


HF,
              RE




Day/Night

Day



Flight Conditions

On Ground - Normal Visibility







Flight Details

Aircraft


 

ANTONOV An-26









Operator

Not Recorded



Type of Flight

Military/State



Flight Origin




Stuttgart Airport







Intended Destination




Kassel-Calden Airport







Take-off Commenced

Yes



Flight Airborne

Yes



Flight Completed

No



Phase of Flight

Landing








Location








Location - Airport

Airport

EDVK




General

Tag(s)


              Non Precision Approach
          




HF

Tag(s)


              Inappropriate crew response - skills deficiency,
              Ineffective Monitoring,
              Manual Handling,
              Procedural non compliance
          




RE

Tag(s)


              Overrun on Landing,
              Excessive Airspeed,
              Late Touchdown
          




Outcome

Damage or injury

Yes



Non-aircraft damage

Yes



Non-occupant Casualties

No



Off Airport Landing

Yes



Ditching

Yes




Causal Factor Group(s)

Group(s)

Aircraft Operation




Safety Recommendation(s)

Group(s)

None Made




Investigation Type

Type

Independent









Description
On 4 October 2007, an Antonov An-26B cargo aircraft being operated for an unidentified Hungarian-registered carrier by a Ukrainian crew on an empty positioning flight from Stuttgart to Kassel overran the destination runway during a daylight landing in normal ground visibility. None of the six crew on board were injured. There was no damage to the aircraft but some damage to ground installations.
Investigation
An investigation was carried out by the German BFU. It was found that the aircraft had been flown at 15% above the applicable reference speed during the LLZ/DME approach during which the runway had been visible from about 4nm out. After the main gear initially touched the 1500 metre runway 22 about 400 metres from the threshold, the aircraft had bounced several times before settling on it permanently from approximately the half way point. Reverse pitch had not been used at first but was eventually selected shortly before the end of the paved surface was reached.
The aircraft overran the centrally ‘domed’ runway just over 40 metres to a final stopping position which was also 47 metres to the left of the runway centreline with the nose of the aircraft orientated towards approximately 120°. The aircraft had sunk up to the wheel rims in soft grass.
No aircraft technical defects were found during the investigation nor had the crew reported any and it was also determined that the benign weather conditions had not had any effect on the outcome.
It was concluded as a result of the investigation that the accident had been due to the fact that:

the aircraft continued the approach with excessive speed
the aircraft did not touch down at the beginning of the runway
following touchdown, full use was not made of the available braking action.

No Safety Recommendations were made.
The Investigation was completed on 10 September 2010 and the Final Report may be seen in full at SKYbrary: BFU EX011-07
Further Reading

Non-Precision Approach
Stabilised Approach
Runway Availability
Landing Distances
Runway Overrun After Unstabilised Approach (OGHFA SE)
Runway Overrun On Landing (OGHFA SE)