AS55, vicinity Fairview Alberta Canada, 1999











  AS55, vicinity Fairview Alberta Canada, 1999









Summary

On 28th April 1999, an AS-355 helicopter suffered an in-flight fire attributed to an electrical fault which had originated from a prior maintenance error undetected during incomplete pre-flight inspections. The aircraft carried out an immediate landing allowing evacuation before the aircraft was destroyed by an intense fire.




Event Details

When

28/04/1999



Event Type


AW,
              FIRE,
              HF




Day/Night

Day



Flight Conditions

VMC







Flight Details

Aircraft


 

AEROSPATIALE AS-355 Ecureuil 2









Operator

Not Recorded



Type of Flight

Public Transport (Non Revenue)



Flight Origin




Fairview Airport







Intended Destination




Fairview Airport







Take-off Commenced

Yes



Flight Airborne

Yes



Flight Completed

No



Phase of Flight

Descent








General

Tag(s)


              Inadequate Airworthiness Procedures
          




FIRE

Tag(s)


              Fire-Electrical origin
          




HF

Tag(s)


              Aircraft acceptance,
              Procedural non compliance
          




EPR

Tag(s)


              Emergency Descent,
              Emergency Evacuation
          




AW

System(s)


              Electrical Power
          



Contributor(s)


              Maintenance Error (valid guidance available)
          




Outcome

Damage or injury

Yes



Aircraft damage

Hull loss



Non-aircraft damage

Yes



Non-occupant Casualties

No



Off Airport Landing

Yes



Ditching

Yes




Causal Factor Group(s)

Group(s)

Aircraft Technical




Safety Recommendation(s)

Group(s)

Aircraft Operation
Aircraft Airworthiness




Investigation Type

Type

Independent









Description
On 28th April 1999, an AS-355 helicopter suffered an in-flight fire attributed to an electrical fault which had originated from a prior maintenance error undetected during incomplete pre-flight inspections. The aircraft carried out an immediate landing allowing evacuation before the aircraft was destroyed by an intense fire.
Summary
The following is an extract of the summary from the official TSB (Canada) Aviation Investigation Report:
"The…AS355…had completed a routine gas pipeline patrol and was returning to Fairview, Alberta… at about 800 ft above ground, the red battery temperature light illuminated on the warning panel. The pilot… turned off the battery. About three minutes later… the helicopter lost all electrical power and the cabin and cockpit began to fill with smoke and fumes. The pilot… accomplished an emergency landing at once on a …field… both occupants evacuated the helicopter without further incident or injury… the helicopter was subsequently destroyed by an intense ground fire."
The report makes the following findings:

"The auxiliary battery paralleling cable was not attached to the positive post of the main battery during routine maintenance.
The in-flight fire occurred when the unattached battery cable arced through the battery compartment forward bulkhead in flight and ignited the flammable nylon survival gear bags in the adjacent baggage compartment.
The proximity of the highly flammable nylon survival gear bags to the battery compartment electrical wiring represented a hazard and contributed to the initiation and propagation of the in-flight fire.
The battery compartment Daily Operating Checks, which may have identified the error, were not being conducted by either pilots or AMEs."

There were other findings relating to the maintenance organisation.
Related Articles

Airworthiness
Human Factors
Fire, Smoke & Fumes

Further Reading
For further information, see the full TSB Report: TSB Aviation Investigation Report A99W0061