MD83, Are/Ostersund Sweden, 2007











  MD83, Are/Ostersund Sweden, 2007









Summary

On 9 September 2007, an MD83 being operated by Austrian Company MAP Jet, which was over the permitted weight for the runway and conditions, made a night take off from Are/Ostersund airport, Sweden, very near the end of the runway and collided with the approach lights for the opposite runway before climbing away.




Event Details

When

09/09/2007



Event Type


GND,
              HF,
              RE




Day/Night

Night



Flight Conditions

On Ground - Normal Visibility







Flight Details

Aircraft


 

MCDONNELL DOUGLAS MD-83









Operator

MAP Jet



Type of Flight

Public Transport (Passenger)



Flight Origin




Åre-Östersund







Intended Destination




Antalya Airport







Take-off Commenced

Yes



Flight Airborne

Yes



Flight Completed

Yes



Phase of Flight

Take Off








Location








Location - Airport

Airport

ESNZ




General

Tag(s)


              Inadequate Aircraft Operator Procedures,
              Ineffective Regulatory Oversight
          




HF

Tag(s)


              Data use error,
              Procedural non compliance,
              Violation
          




RE

Tag(s)


              Overrun on Take Off,
              Unable to rotate at VR
          




Outcome

Damage or injury

Yes



Aircraft damage

Minor



Non-aircraft damage

Yes



Non-occupant Casualties

No



Occupant Injuries

None



Occupant Fatalities

None



Off Airport Landing

No



Ditching

No




Causal Factor Group(s)

Group(s)

Aircraft Operation




Safety Recommendation(s)

Group(s)

Aircraft Operation




Investigation Type

Type

Independent









Description
On 9 September 2007, an MCDONNELL DOUGLAS MD-83 being operated by Austrian Company MAP Jet, which was over the permitted weight for the runway and conditions, made a night take off from Are/Ostersund airport, Sweden, and after failing to get airborne until almost the end of the runway, collided with the approach lights for the opposite runway direction before climbing away and completing the intended flight to Antalya.
The Investigation
An Annex 13 Serious Incident Investigation was carried out by the Swedish AIB and their Report was published on 18 September 2009. The Investigation found that:

The take off was made more than 3 tonnes above the maximum permitted weight for the runway and prevailing conditions.
Rotation was initiated when 630 metres of the runway remained and was slower than normal
The nose wheel lifted when 250 metres of the runway remained.
The main wheels lifted when 30 metres of the runway remained.
The height of the aircraft as it passed the runway threshold was less than 30 cm.

It also concluded that both the arrangements under which the flight crew were operating as employees of the aircraft lessor (MAP) and the implementation of JAR-OPS procedures by that aircraft operator were not properly constituted.
The overall conclusion published in the Final Report was that:
"The incident was caused by deficiencies in the company’s handling of the balance between flight safety and production. These deficiencies lead, among other things, to that take off performance calculations was carried out without some limiting factors, implying that the aircraft mass exceeded the maximum allowed under the prevailing conditions."
Safety Recommendations
Two Safety Recommendations were made in the Final Report:

"The Swedish Transport Agency is recommended to increase the number of SAFA inspections (Safety Assessment of Foreign Aircraft), and in the international flight safety community (to) work for these inspections (to be) completed with control of the statements regarding operational documentation of the actual flight.
The Swedish Transport Agency is recommended to (support) the Austrian Civil Aviation Authority (to) follow up the work of improvement within the (aircraft operator) regarding (the) Safety Management System (and the) employment routines and training of cockpit crew."

Related Articles

Runway Excursion
Aircraft Load and Trim
Use of Erroneous Parameters at Take-Off
Accident and Serious Incident Reports: RE: a selection of reports on events which resulted in a runway excursion.

Further Reading

The full Swedish AIB Report (Report RL 2009:14E)