ALLCLEAR? Toolkit











  ALLCLEAR? Toolkit










ALLCLEAR? is part of the Air Ground Communication (AGC) Safety Improvement Initiative launched by the EUROCONTROL Safety Team in 2004. It builds on the recommendations and best-practices presented in the AGC European Action Plan.
Welcome Pilots and Controllers
Enhance your radio communication skills with the ALLCLEAR? toolkit. Already perfect? Sure?
Trainer's Zone
The ALLCLEAR? toolkit gives airline and ATS trainers a range of training resources. Use the resources to run a training session for your people. Show a video ... discuss it ... hand out the top tips! Adapt the materials to suit your own needs. Try out the online training for yourself ... and then introduce others to it.
Download all training materials or click on the individual links below.

Training ideas A short document with lesson ideas and previews of the introduction training.
Introduction training A short introduction to air-ground communicatons errors and their consequences. Designed to be used as an introduction to a training session on improving safety through better communications.
Video commentaries Giving you all you need for a good classroom discussion. Includes: example questions and answers, learning points and best-practice tips.

Class room DVD
Request high resolution DVD of the video clips you can view on this page.
Not using the videos?
The lesson facilitation notes offer an alternative approach for those not using the videos as a primary teaching aid.
 
See the problems - what would YOU do?
View dramatised events that have actually happened. Why did they happen? How could they be avoided? These video clips are short reconstructions of real events. Watch them with, or without the transcripts. You can also download the self-study notes to get even more benefit from them.











 Read more




Call sign confusion














 Read more




Blocked transmission














 Read more




Radio discipline














 Read more




Loss of communication










Quote of the day
"We know that you know that we know that you know most of what there is to say on Air Ground Communications. However knowing a bit more always helps"
MB - a trainer
ALLCLEAR? The path to clear communications
Air Ground Communication breakdown has been a causal factor in a number of serious accidents; and is a significant factor in many near-misses. The statistics speak for themselves.
Interactive training

Use the EUROCONTROL interactive training to test and enhance your R/T skills. Takes just 20 minutes.
A guide to phraseology for general aviation pilots in Europe. Read, listen and prepare yourself before your flight.

ALLCLEAR? bookshelf
Highlighted documents

Top Tips - 5 key things to remember (for pilots and controllers)
European Action Plan for Air Ground Communications Safety - the detailed document behind this intiative
R/T Phraseology Manual - updated in 2010 and aligned with ICAO guidelines










Related resources
SKYclips









 Read more




Callsign Confusion (SKYclip)













 Read more




Readback Hearback (SKYclip)













 Read more




CPDLC (SKYclip)













 Read more




Emergency Frequency (SKYclip)