Hindsight 23











  Hindsight 23









Article Information

Category:



General 








Content source:




 EUROCONTROL





 









Content control:




 SKYbrary





 
















Published in June 2016, HindSight 23 focused on Situational Awareness.
HindSight 23 Articles
Keynote

Keynote: by Frank Brenner.

Editorial

Out of sight, out of mind: Editorial by Tzvetomir Blajev.
SA and Nathan Poloski's injustice: by Professor Sidney Dekker.

The View from Above

The changing context of Situational Awareness: by Captain Ed Pooley.

Case Study

Case Study - The Blue Pram: by Bengt Collin.

Comment 1: by Dragan Milanovski.
Comment 2: by Shota Janashia.
Comment 3: by Captain Wolfgang Starke.



From the Briefing Room

Situational Awareness versus Time in Position: by Dr Michaela Schwarz and Fuat Rusitovic.
How much are we aware of situations: by Florence-Marie Jegoux.
Situation Awareness - another Naked Emperor: by Anne Isaac.
Orange is the new black...enhanced airfield signage to improve situational awareness in the vicinity of aerodrome construction works: by Gael Le Bris, David Siewert and Robert Berlucchi.
Improving situational awareness through better SOPs: by Captain Ed Pooley.
Enhancing situational awareness and reducing pilot-caused runway incursions through optimised chart presentation of aerodrome Hot Spots: by Mike Edwards.
What you see on a TCAS Traffic Display is not always what you will get: by Stanislaw Drozdowski and Captain Max Butter.
Situational awareness - changes over a pilot career: from DC9 to A340: by Captain Johan Glantz.
So what does it look like?: by Maciej Szczukowski.
Detection of Potential Runway and Manoeuvring Area Conflicts or "how do you know who's on your runway?": by Richard "Sid" Lawrence.
Are you aware of what catches your attention?: by Jean-Jacques Speyer.
Does more information equal better situational awareness?: by Captain Wolfgang Starke.
Situational Awareness: by Lt Col Bruno Beeckmans.
Enhanced pilot situational awareness through the digital/graphical pre-flight briefing concept: by Renee Pylchen-Medwed and Eduard Porosnicu.
Shared situational awareness between human and machine: by Dr David Thompson.
Mitigating CFIT risk with innovative controller radar displays graphics which enhance situational awareness: by Dr A O Braseth.
Alan's bad day at the office: by Mike Edwards.

Related SKYbrary Articles

Situational Awareness

Register to Receive Your Copy of HindSight Magazine
Register here for a hardcopy of HindSight magazine to be sent to you by post every time a new edition is published
See all editions of HindSight magazine




Categories


General












Feedback