NATS Safety Culture Journey 2











  NATS Safety Culture Journey 2









Article Information

Category:



Safety Culture 








Content source:




 EUROCONTROL





 









Content control:




 SKYbrary





 















Description
The EUROCONTROL Safety Culture Programme has been running for more than ten years, and there has been an ongoing survey of ten ANSPs to discuss their 'safety culture journeys' - how they got into safety culture, the usefulness of the survey process to ANSPs, and whether they plan to continue. The following video shows an interview for one of the ANSPs, NATS in the UK. The interviewee is Dr David Harrison, NATS Safety Director and also Chair of the CANSO Safety Standing Committee. The interviewer is Barry Kirwan of EUROCONTROL.
What does safety culture mean to you?
Questions and Points Answered (in sequence)

Why did NATS get into safety culture?
What are the main challenges in getting started?
What about Just Culture?
Is Just Culture a prerequisite for safety?
What changes has safety culture brought?
How do you persuade the NATS CEO on the importance of safety culture?
How does the NATS Board work with safety issues?
How does NATS make use of a safety dashboard?
Safety culture and the regulator
How does safety culture fit with your safety management system?
Does safety culture represent value for money?
On safety culture improvement via sharing information across ANSPs
What are NATS’ goals for safety?
How do you prevent cost pressures adversely affecting safety?
What are CANSO’s safety goals?
How do you detect if safety is slipping?
How do you encourage people to speak up on safety concerns?
What about safety culture and Functional Airspace Blocks (FABs)?
How about safety culture in airlines and airports?
How do you balance safety with other Key Performance Areas (KPAs)?
Is competition between ANSPs an issue for safety culture?
Do safety culture surveys need Human Factors skills?
Is safety culture relevant to NATS’ future challenges?
What are the future challenges for safety culture?
Do you have any advice for a CEO thinking of embarking on a safety culture survey?

Related Articles

Safety Culture
Safety Culture in ATM
Just Culture





Categories


Safety Culture












Feedback