Hindsight 19











  Hindsight 19









Article Information

Category:



General 








Content source:




 EUROCONTROL





 









Content control:




 SKYbrary





 
















Published in July 2014, HindSight 19 focused on Runway Safety.
HindSight 19 Articles
Keynote

Keynote: by Frank Brenner.

Editorial

If you are healthy, do you stop taking care of your health?: Editorial by Tzvetomir Blajev.
The construction of runway safety: by Professor Sidney Dekker.

The View from Above

Hazardous runway overruns and their precursors: by Captain Ed Pooley.

Front Line Report

Runway safety - concerto for ATCO and orchestra: by Maciej Szczukowski.

Case Study

Case Study - A Day in the Life: by Bengt Collin.

Comment 1: by Jim Krieger.
Comment 2: by Captain Ed Pooley.
Comment 3: by Mike Edwards.



From the Briefing Room

“Your safety is our mission” – How Europe is enabling airport operators to tackle runway safety with a harmonised approach: by Sarah Poralla..
Tearing down barriers – building up relationships: by Jim Krieger..
Brussels Airport continuously improves its runway safety concept: by Jan Loncke and Davy Van Hyfte.
Runway safety at Amsterdam Schiphol: by Job Bruggen and Jan Smeitink..
Runway safety - automation versus knowledge: by Captain Dirk De Winter.
Aerodrome layout and the potential for modifications to improve runway safety: by Captain Andre Skandsen.
The runway collision risk: how do we know?: by Captain Bertrand de Courville.
To land or not to land – causal and contributory factors in landing without clearance events: by Alfonso Barba.
Mind the gap...keeping aircraft operations safe during runway construction works: by Gaël Le Bris.
Sustaining an effective runway safety team: by Iain White.
Adherence makes the difference: by Captain Wolfgang Starke.

HindSight Situational Example

Unexpected runway crossing

Related SKYbrary Articles

Runway Incursion
Other editions of HindSight

Register to Receive Your Copy of HindSight Magazine
Register here for a hardcopy of HindSight magazine to be sent to you by post every time a new edition is published




Categories


General












Feedback