ES2 2010











  ES2 2010









Article Information

Category:



General 








Content source:




 SKYbrary





 









Content control:




 SKYbrary





 















In 2010, SASI project became ES2, which is a forum of exchange of safety related knowledge between ANSPs and stakeholders. During this year, 5 working sessions have been held in Belgium, Romania, Italy, Portugal, Serbia and the target audience comprised safety managers, line managers, financial managers and safety specialists.
Go back to all editions of ES2 Meetings
Contents

1 WS 01-10
2 WS 02-10
3 WS 03-10
4 WS 04-10
5 WS 05-10

WS 01-10

The start of the five working sessions was given by the first workshop held at Brussels between 4-5 march, whose theme was "Safety Benefits and Day-to-Day Observation".
Below are the agenda of the workshop and the associated presentations.

Workshop Agenda
Safety Benefits Workshop by NATS
MOCK Safety Data Diagram

 
WS 02-10

The second working session from 2010 took place between 29 June-1st pf July at ROMATSA, Bucharest. Its topic was "Safety Maturity/ Cost of SMS" and was focused more on the cost model for the development, maintenance and day-to-day operations of a SMS.
The presentations from the workshop are below:

Workshop Agenda
Commission Regulation on the Performance Scheme
SMS Cost Model
Use of SMS Cost Model
Introduction to Cost of SMS
Introduction to Safety KPIs

WS 03-10
The third working session was held at ENAV, Rome between 8-10th of June. The subjects discussed there were concentrated around "Safety Monitoring and KPIs". The participants had received a full briefing on APF, its potential uses and they were required to make inputs into some interactive sessions.
The agenda and the presentations from this meeting are attached below:

ES2 WS 03 Agenda
Draft Commission Regulation
Introduction to Aerospace Performance Factor
Evolution of APF: EUROCONTROL-ENAV Approach
Safety KPIs

 
WS 04-10
The fourth workshop took place between 14-16th of September at NAV Portugal, Lisbon. It was entitled "Practical Safety Assessments" and it was focused on examples from ANSPs, on the lessons learned on safety assessments. The participants had the chance to involve into three exercises that helped them understand better how to make a safety assessment.
Below are attached the materials from this workshop:

ANP Ratings Model
The Analytic Hierarchy Process
ANP Model Designed for the Olympic Games
Blue Med FAB Safety Case
Safety Assessment Activity: Reconstruction of RWY at Zagreb Airport
Safety Assessment Bosnia & Herzegovina
Safety Assessment for Airspace Design
NAV Portugal
NAV Portugal Lisbon Tower Safety Case
Activities for OCG
OCG - Preliminary Safety Assessment
OCG -Safety Case for Minor Change
OCG - Safety Plan

 
WS 05-10
The fifth workshop from this year is also known as CEOs Meeting. It took place at SMATSA, Serbia between 26-28 October and the topic was "SMS in Operation". During this meeting, the Annual ES2 Report was analysed and priorities for 2011 have been set; the impact of safety in decision making was also an interrelated topic.
The agenda and the materials from this meeting are listed :

CEOs Wokshop - Welcome & Objectives
ES2 in 2010, ES2 in 2011
Safety intelligence and CEOs
Balancing Safety and Other Constraints
Operational Safety Indicators and Targets
Top 5 ATM Safety Concerns - EUROCONTROL View
Top 5 Safety Concerns -Results from the Survey
AHP Training: The Magic of Measuring
Exercise on Balanced Performance - Improved Routes in a FAB Context
Safety Performance Metrics, FAA
Safety, Single Sky and FABs by DFS
Managing Risk at easyJet
Safety Culture: Leading from the Top by Avinor
Keeping Safety First
ES2 2011 Tentative Programme
Safety intelligence: Skills and Traits of Senior Managers
Lessons Learned from Deepwater Horizon

Go back to all editions of ES2 Meetings




Categories


General












Feedback