European Safety Promotion Network Rotorcraft











  European Safety Promotion Network Rotorcraft









Article Information

Category:



Helicopter Safety 








Content source:




 SKYbrary





 









Content control:




 SKYbrary





 















Background
The European Safety Promotion Network Rotorcraft (ESPN-R) was established in January 2017 by the European Union Aviation Safety Agency (EASA) Rotorcraft Sectorial Committee, which is now called simply the Rotorcraft Committee (R.COM). The R.COM is one of 10 stakeholder advisory bodies (SABs) that provide EASA with a forum for consultation on agency priorities at the strategic and technical levels. The SABs, Member States’ Advisory Body (MAB) and Technical Bodies (TeBs) provide consultation on all aspects of the rulemaking process and also contribute to the Agency Rulemaking Programme and the European Plan for Aviation Safety (EPAS).
Membership
The ESPN-R is a mixed industry-authorities team with members drawn from the former European Helicopter Safety Team (EHEST) community and the former European Helicopter Safety Implementation Team. The ESPN-R has three coordinators. The R.COM nominates two: one from the original equipment manufacturer community and from the operator community. EASA fills the third coordinator role to assure alignment with EASA objectives and processes.
Activities
The ESPN-R develops, disseminates and evaluates safety promotion material and actions in support of the R.COM, EASA and the industry. The voluntary group also helps to implement safety promotion actions from the EPAS and from the EASA Rotorcraft Safety Roadmap. It also can suggest safety promotion actions from inclusion in the EPAS.
The scope of ESPN-R’s activities include operations and safety management systems, training and emerging safety-enhancing technologies, for which research and development material, studies, previous EHEST work and expert advice is considered.
Related Articles

International Helicopter Safety Team
Vertical Aviation Safety Team

Further Reading
EASA Community Network: Rotorcraft
 




Categories


Helicopter Safety












Feedback