Unit Competence Scheme











  Unit Competence Scheme









Article Information

Category:



General 








Content source:




 SKYbrary





 









Content control:




 SKYbrary





 















Definition
"Unit Competence Scheme" means an approved scheme indicating the method by which the unit maintains the competence of its licence holders.
Source: Commission Regulation (EU) No 805/2011
Description
Note: This article is based on the legislation applicable in the European Union (mainly Regulation 2015/340). While the content is not universally applicable, it is valid in outside Europe as well, as similar procedures are adopted in many other countries.
The Unit Competence Scheme (UCS) is a document that contains the procedures and means to demonstrate that air traffic controllers working in a specific unit have the necessary knowledge and skills to perform their duties.
The UCS is established by the ANSP and is subject to approval by the relevant regulator (competent authority). It is created for each and every ATS unit, although similar units (e.g. control towers or approach control units) in the same country are likely to have very similar procedures (especially if they are parts of the same ANSP).
The UCS sets the procedures for:

Competence assessment (e.g. what methods are to be used and how often, who can perform the assessment, etc.) as well as follow-up procedures in case of failure
Unit endorsement (see note below) revalidation. These include the requirements for minimum hours a controller must work within a defined timeframe, the maximum acceptable continuous period for not exercising the privileges, the necessary training courses (e.g. refresher), procedures for successful completion of competency assessment, etc. The UCS also defines the period of validity of the unit endorsement.
Situations where the usual revalidation procedures cannot be followed (e.g. due to a person not exercising the privileges in their licence for a prolonged period of time or due to insufficient hours within a specified period of time)
Continuation training (e.g. content and duration of refresher and conversion training)
Provisional inability (a temporary state where the controller is unable to work (due to e.g. fatigue, stress, etc.) but their license and medical certificate remain valid)
Ensuring adequate performance of practical instructors as well as description of their qualificaitons and responsibilities.
Process administration (e.g. record keeping, UCS review and amendment, etc.). This includes records for working hours, examination results, etc.

Note: The unit endorsement is a part of the ATCO license that allows the controller to work at a specified working position (e.g. Heathrow Tower, Maastricht Control, etc.).
Related ARticles

Minimum Hours in Position
How Air Traffic Control Works
ATCO Refresher Training
Regulation 2015/340 - Technical Requirements and Administrative Procedures relating to Air Traffic Controllers' Licences
	 





Categories


General,
              HF-ATM












Feedback