Achievement of Contingency Planning











  Achievement of Contingency Planning









Article Information

Category:



Emergency and Contingency 








Content source:




 SKYbrary





 









Content control:




 SKYbrary





 















Definition
Achievement verifies that the detailed means for translating contingency plans into reality are effectively in place. It covers testing, exercising, maintaining and reviewing the various contingency plans and raising awareness of contingency within air navigation service providers (ANSPs).
Objective
The aim of the achievement phase in the contingency planning process is to provide sufficient assurances to stakeholders that it will be possible to implement specified plans in the event of contingency operations.
Description
The activities to be performed at this phase are:

Test, exercise and validate that the planned contingency measures could be executed and are efficient.
Ensure that the Human related aspects (license, training, competence scheme) are in place to provide the required services in contingency situations.
Check feasibility and acceptance of staff relocation arrangements.
Check security aspects.
Maintain preparedness for contingency situations.

Related Articles

Contingency Process
Engineering Aspects of Contingency
Training for Contingency Operations
Testing and Exercising
Human Factors in Contingency
Promotion in Contingency
Security Management for Contingency

Further Reading

For further information on Contingency Planning see the EUROCONTROL, Guidelines for Contingency Planning for Air Navigation Services (including Service Continuity) In particular, Chapter 7.
Achievement, Execution, Assurance and Promotion of Contingency Informations related to achievement of contingency ( exercise, training, testing, execution) can be found here.
See also the EUROCONTROL Reference Guide to EUROCONTROL Guidelines for Contingency Planning In particular, section 7 as well as the Annex on Achievement.





Categories


Emergency and Contingency,
              ANS Contingency Planning












Feedback