EUROCONTROL MSAW Specification and Guidance Material











  EUROCONTROL MSAW Specification and Guidance Material









Article Information

Category:



Safety Nets 








Content source:




 SKYbrary





 









Content control:




 EUROCONTROL





 















Description
MSAW (Minimum Safe Altitude Warning) warns the controller about increased risk of Controlled Flight Into Terrain (CFIT) accidents by generating, in a timely manner, an alert of aircraft proximity to terrain or obstacles.

Since 1998, EUROCONTROL has produced safety net guidelines to support the implementation of safety nets in the European Civil Aviation Conference (ECAC) area. These specify the minimum requirements and provide guidance for the definition, implementation, optimisation and operation of ground-based safety nets. This article provides references to EUROCONTROL Minimum Safe Altitude Warning (MSAW) Specification and Guidance Material. Links to the articles about the other safety nets can be found at the bottom of this page.
EUROCONTROL MSAW Specification and Guidance Material has been developed over the years by the safety nets community based on the accumulated practical experience.
EUROCONTROL MSAW ‘Level 2’ Specification and Guidance Material
The EUROCONTROL MSAW Specification describes the minimum requirements for the development, configuration and use of MSAW in Europe. The Specification exists only as the final draft version while the Guidance Material has a ‘released’ status. Currently, there is no plan to undertake any further development of the Specification.
EUROCONTROL Specification for Minimum Safe Altitude Warning Draft
Comprehensive guidance material to assist in implementing the EUROCONTROL Specification for Minimum Safe Altitude Warning covers the full MSAW lifecycle:

Definition of objectives


Implementation or change


Tuning and validation


Operation and monitoring

The MSAW Guidance is provide with several appendices to support ANSPs in the implementation of MSAW.
EUROCONTROL Guidance Material for Minimum Safe Altitude Warning Released
Appendix A: Reference MSAW System: Detailed technical explanation of typical implementation details of MSAW with emphasis on parameterisation and performance optimisation. Optimisation concepts are also covered in detail.
Appendix B: Safety Assurance: A set of three documents that can be used as starting point for MSAW safety assurance work in a particular local context.

Appendix B-1: Safety Argument for MSAW System: This document describes a possible initial Safety Argument.


Appendix B-2: Generic Safety Plan for MSAW Implementation: Describes what safety assurance activities should be considered at each lifecycle phase, who should do them, and what the criteria for success are.


Appendix B-3: Outline Safety Case for MSAW System: Addresses in detail the assurance and evidence from the System Definition stage and outlines the likely assurance and evidence for the later stages.

Appendix C: Cost Framework:

Appendix C: Cost Framework for the Standardisation of MSAW: A set of guidelines for users of the Cost Framework (an Excel model) to assess the economic impact of the standardisation of Minimum Safe Altitude Warning for individual ANSPs.
Appendix C: Supporting Spreadsheet: Supporting Excel spreadsheet for the Cost Framework model.

Appendix D: Case Study: A set of two documents describing the (partial) application of the optimisation and safety assurance guidance material in a demanding environment.

Appendix D-1: Enhancement of MSAW for Skyguide. Identifies potential solutions for extending MSAW coverage throughout skyguide’s area of responsibility.


Appendix D-2: Functional Hazard Assessment of MSAW for Skyguide. Describes the Functional Hazard Assessment of the identified potential solutions for extending MSAW, performed as an initial step of safety assurance activities.

EUROCONTROL MSAW ‘Level 3’ Documentation
The ‘Level 3’ material, published in 2017, is a series of documents specifying the minimum requirements and providing guidance for the definition, implementation, optimisation and operation of safety nets. These guidelines, building on the legacy of the previous two editions, are intended to facilitate the harmonisation of safety nets by providing recommendations and implementation examples.
It is important to note that the ‘Level 3’ documents are guidelines as opposed to the mandatory ‘Level 2’ Specifications they replace. This allows ANSPs to adopt a more flexible approach towards implementing safety nets that meets their needs. The guidelines also complements other recognised documentation such as International Civil Aviation Organisation (ICAO) provisions.
Part I - Concept and Requirements - describes the safety net concept of operations and requirements.
Part II - Lifecycle Description - contains overall guidance for the various stages of the safety nets lifecycle.
Part III - Implementation and Optimisation Examples - provides a generic implementation example and detailed guidance for optimisation and testing of that safety net.
Related Articles

Minimum Safe Altitude Warning (MSAW)


EUROCONTROL STCA Specification and Guidance Material


EUROCONTROL APM Specification and Guidance Material


EUROCONTROL APW Specification and Guidance Material

Further Reading

EUROCONTROL Safety Nets Guide, 21 May 2011
EUROCONTROL Safety Nets Guide 2017
NetAlert 22





Categories


Safety Nets












Feedback