Hindsight 28











  Hindsight 28









Article Information

Category:



General 








Content source:




 EUROCONTROL





 









Content control:




 SKYbrary





 
















Download the full HindSight 28 magazine here
Published in February 2019, HindSight 28 focused on the theme of Change: Changing to adapt and adapting to change.
This edition also includes a supplement only available on-line. Download the On-line Supplement to HindSight 28 here
Welcome
"Welcome to Issue 28 of HindSight magazine. The theme of this Issue is ‘Change’. Changes in aviation – in organisations, in industry and in society generally – affect us all, and can affect the safety of air traffic management. The pace of change is increasing. Change is necessary to adapt to the changing world, and we need to adapt to these changes as individuals, teams, and organisations.
In this issue, we have articles from the front-line, as well as from safety, legal, leadership, human factors and psychology specialists. All HindSight articles are written and selected to be interesting and useful to the primary readers of HindSight: air traffic controllers and professional pilots, and hopefully to all others who support operational work. Let us know what you think about this edition and about the magazine in general. And tell your colleagues about it, whether the paper version or HindSight online, at SKYbrary. If you need more copies for your Ops room, then please let us know.
This Issue starts with a section on the nature of change and some fundamental issues and implications. The following sections consider various types of changes, to airport operations, equipment and tools, airspace, procedures and traffic flows, jobs, and laws and regulations. The regular feature on ‘Views from Elsewhere’ includes articles from shipping, healthcare, banking, and psychotherapy for front- line professions. The articles cover many different types of change: large and small, systemic and individual, long- and short-term, obvious and subtle. The authors address a number of questions, such as: Why is there a need for change? What needs to change? Who makes changes, for whom? How should changes occur? When should change occur, and over how long? What influences whether change is successful, or not? What happens after change? How do we adapt to changing situations? Throughout, there is an emphasis on front-line involvement in change.
The next Issue of HindSight is on the theme of ‘Goal Conflicts and Trade-offs’. Safety is the focus of this magazine and is obviously critical to air traffic management, but it is one of several goals, including cost-efficiency, CO2 emissions, noise, capacity, and security. How do these goals interact? What kinds of trade-offs are made as a result? Let us know, in a few words or more, for your magazine on the safety or air traffic management – HindSight."
HindSight 28 Articles
Foreword

DG's Foreword, by Eamonn Brennan, Director General of EUROCONTROL.

Editorial

A desk is a dangerous place from which to watch the world, by Steven Shorrock.

Op-ed

Four modes of change:to, for, with, by, by Cormac Russell.

Fundamental Issues

Mode switching in air traffic control, by Zsófi Berkes and Miguel Aulet.
Not so fast: resisting the urge for urgency, by Mark Hughes.

Changes to Airport Operations

How not to perform a runway change, by Alexander Schwassmann.
One step at a time..., by Sebastian Daeunert.
The curious incident of the runway incursion in the night-time, by Steven Shorrock.

Changes to Equipment and Tools

Seeing the need for change...from the outside, by Florence-Marie Jegoux, Ludovic Mieusset, and Sebastian Follet.
Are you thinking about Jim?, by Adrian Bednarek.
H-Day: a success story from 50 years ago, by Anders Ellerstrand.

Changes to Airspace, Procedures and Traffic Flows

Close encounters of the legal kind: a need for airspace change?, by Marc Baumgartner.
Adapting to small changes, by Julie Baltet.
GNSS rules ok!, by Emmanuelle Gravalon.
The dance of change in Turkish airspace, by Önder Toydemir and Arife Aycan Mutlu.
Safety management Q&A, by Santiago Cortes.

Changes to Jobs

Changing jobs: old habits die hard, by Caroline Fauquembergue.
Retirement - the end or a new start?, by Anders Ellerstrand.
The just culture journey in Europe: looking back and looking forward, by Roderick van Dam, Maria Kovacova and Tony Licu.

Changes in Law and Regulation

The long read: positive just culture for modern times, by Forentino-Gregorio Ruiz Yamuza.
Quick brief: EU 2017/373, by Anthony Seychell.

Change Management

Social partners for change management, by Aaron Curtis.

View from the Air

Hidden change, by Nick Carpenter.

Views from elsewhere

Adaptation at sea: hindsight and foresight, by Nippin Anand.
Bottom-up safety change in healthcare: overcoming resistance to obvious improvements, by Rob Hackett.
Don't be a superhero: recognising stress and building resillience, by Thomas Hellwig.
Thoughts from a velvet sofa, by Maciej Szczukowski.

In Conversation

Learning from psychology and psychotherapy: a conversation with David Murphy, by David Murphy and Steven Shorrock.

HindSight 28 On-line Supplement

The future of mobility, by Claire Williams, Liam Mullen and Wolfgang Schuster.

Register to Receive Your Copy of HindSight Magazine
Register here for a copy of HindSight magazine to be sent to you by post or email every time a new edition is published
See all editions of HindSight magazine




Categories


General












Feedback