European Business Aviation Association (EBAA)











  European Business Aviation Association (EBAA)









Article Information

Category:



Business Aviation







Content source:




 SKYbrary





 









Content control:




 SKYbrary





 















Description
The European Business Aviation Association (EBAA) is an organisation for operators of business aircraft in Europe. The purpose of the Association is to enhance all aspects of European business aviation. The EBAA works in a number of areas, inclusive of, but not limited to:

Improvement of safety standards
Advancement of positive regulation
Facilitation of all aspects of business aviation to enable flexible, time efficient, point to point, air transportation for individuals, business and government personnel

Founded in 1977, the EBAA represents more than 700 members companies, inclusive of corporate operators, commercial operators, manufacturers, airports, fixed-based operators, and others, with a combined fleet of more than 1,000 aircraft.
Mission Statement
The stated mission of the European Business Aviation Association is "to enable responsible, sustainable growth for Business aviation, enhancing connectivity and creating opportunities".
Priorities
The EBAA advances polices intended to better the European Business aviation sector. Developing policy proposals and advocating for a changing industry is at the forefront of EBAA’s actions. Current priorities include:

Access to airports - with the privatisation of airports and the growth of scheduled aviation, Business aviation operators face serious challenges with access to a growing number of key airports in Europe.
Access to airspace - current airspace utilisation and Air Traffic Management protocols do not fully support the variance in speed and altitude capabilities of the business aviation fleet, nor do they fully service all airports utilised by those aircraft, resulting in access limitations and time and fuel inefficiencies.
Safety - much of the regulatory safety requirements are focused on the realities of the large fleet, commercial scheduled air carrier operators. These regulations do not always translate well in the context of the Business aviation realities of single aircraft, single crew fleets and on-demand operations
Sustainablity - The EBAA acts to support and guide the Business aviation sector towards improving its sustainability practices and creating a greener future for the wider transport sector as a whole. Priorities include improvements in fuel efficiency, emission reduction and carbon neutral growth

Working Groups
Much of the EBAA policy development work is undertaken by volunteer, subject matter experts from all over Europe working in groups and committees. Working groups currently include, but are not limited to, the following:

Advocacy Committee - examines policy issues and assists the EBAA in developing common positions and advocacy strategies for the Business aviation sector.
Safety Committee - promoting the use of best practices for all members, inclusive of approaches to reduce risk and to implement initiatives that will help improve safety. The EBAA also communicates changes in safety rules and regulations to help members understand and respond appropriately
S.T.A.R.S. (Standards & Training for Aviation Responsibility and Sustainability) Committee - an initiative set in motion by young business aviation professionals from across Europe to develop and introduce industry-wide sustainability standards

Contact
The EBAA is based in Brussels, Belgium, has active LinkedIn, Twitter and Facebook accounts, and can be contacted for more information by phone at +32 2 318 28 00 or by email at [email protected]
Related Articles

General Aviation (GA)
Business Aviation
National Business Aviation Association (NBAA)
Canadian Business Aviation Association (CBAA)
Asian Business Aviation Association (AsBAA)
European Business Aviation Association (EBAA)
International Business Aviation Council (IBAC)





Categories


Business Aviation,
              General Aviation












Feedback