Promotion Material for the Prevention of Loss of Communication











  Promotion Material for the Prevention of Loss of Communication









Article Information

Category:



Air Ground Communication 








Content source:




 SKYbrary





 









Content control:




 SKYbrary





 















Description 
Air–ground communications is a key component for the safe and expeditious operation of aircraft. Conversely, a loss of communication can result in undesirable and sometimes unsafe situations. A prolonged loss of communication (PLOC) additionally creates a security concern and could result in military response measures, e.g. the activation of armed fighter aircraft (Quick Reaction Alert, QRA).
The awareness of all stakeholders is required to avoid such incidents and to emphasise actions for a timely recovery of communications if a loss of communication should have happened. The following promotion material is available for all stakeholders to promote the issue and help reduce occurrences. Different forms of promotion and extent allow for a tailored distribution.
Promotion Material
The following material mainly targets front line operators such as flight crews and air traffic controllers.
Emergency Frequency Awareness Poster
This catchy poster is a joint initiative of EUROCONTROL, ECA, IFATCA, IATA and CANSO. It highlights the importance of radio telephony discipline on emergency frequencies with a funny touch. The QR-code redirects to the Emergency Frequency SKYclip.
The PDF-Version is best suited for digital distribution, e.g. in a safety note. The JPG-file can be used to include your organisation’s logo in the lower right corner prior to dissemination or printing, e.g. for display in a briefing area.
Emergency Frequency Awareness Poster 2022 (PDF)
Emergency Frequency Awareness Poster 2022 (PNG) (Option to add your logo)
 
ICAO OPS Bulletin 2021 with Principles and Best Practices in Case of Loss of Air-Ground Communication
This bulletin describes the issue and its causes with a special emphasis on the recovery of communication. It provides recommendations for aircraft operators, ATC units, flight crews and air traffic controllers. It was developed by a project team of ICAO’s European Aviation System Planning Group.
ICAO EUR OPS Bulletin 2021 (PDF)
NATO & EUROCONTROL CommLoss Awareness Leaflet and Poster
NATO and EUROCONTROL worked together in publishing this catchy poster and this concise leaflet including the most effective best practices for mitigating loss of communication.
NATO & EUROCONTROL CommLoss Leaflet 2019 (PDF)
NATO & EUROCONTROL CommLoss Poster 2019 (PDF)
ALLCLEAR? Toolkit
The ALLCLEAR? toolkit gives airline and ATS trainers a range of training resources. Use the resources to run a training session for your people. Show a video ... discuss it ... hand out the top tips! Adapt the materials to suit your own needs. Try out the online training for yourself ... and then introduce others to it.
ALLCLEAR? Toolkit
Further Reading

Tackling the risks of ComLoss – a community effort, EUROCONTROL website
Position Paper on Loss of Communication with ATC, IFALPA 2021





Categories


Air Ground Communication









Related SKYclips









 Read more




Callsign Confusion (SKYclip)













 Read more




Readback Hearback (SKYclip)













 Read more




Emergency Frequency (SKYclip)









Related Articles 

Radio Discipline
Loss of communication
Prolonged loss of communication
ATCO Actions during Prolonged Loss of Communication
Pilot-Controller Communications (OGHFA BN)













Feedback