Regulation 2023/893 amending Regulation 2015/340











  Regulation 2023/893 amending Regulation 2015/340









Article Information

Category:



Single European Sky 








Content source:




 SKYbrary





 









Content control:




 SKYbrary





 















COMMISSION IMPLEMENTING REGULATION (EU) 2023/893 of 21 April 2023 amending Regulation (EU) 2015/340 laying down technical requirements and administrative procedures relating to air traffic controllers’ licences and certificates - text published in the Official Journal of the European Union
Objective
To update Regulation 2015/340 to ensure that it is fit for purpose, cost-effective and in line with the globally applicable standards and practices.
Summary
Note: This Regulation introduces a large number of changes. This article summarizes the most important of those that alter training- and license-related procedures. Editorial changes and clarifications are not included.
The scope of the Regulation is expanded to include rules and procedures for the conversion of national air traffic controller licences obtained during military service into Union air traffic controller licences (i.e. to facilitate the convestion from military to civil air traffic controllers).
Four new definitions are added and five existing definitions are updated.
Changes to ratings and rating endorsements

The Aerodrome Control Instrument (ADI) rating will be replaced by Aerodrome Control (ADC)
The Aerodrome Control Visual (ADV) rating will not be granted but existing holders will have their licences revalidated
The following rating endorsements will not be granted:

Air Control (AIR)
Ground Movement Control (GMC)
Tower Control (TWR)
Ground Movement Surveillance (GMS)
Aerodrome Radar Control (RAD)
Terminal Control (TCL)


The privileges of the AIR, GMC and TWR rating endorsements will become part of the ADC rating. If the holder is limited to air control or ground control only, this shall be indicated in the unit endorsement.
The privileges of the Ground Movement Surveillance (GMS) rating endorsement will be incorporated in the unit endorsement.
The Aerodrome Radar Control (RAD) rating endorsement will be replaced by Aerodrome Control Surveillance (SUR) rating endorsement.
The privileges of the Terminal Control (TCL) rating endorsement will be incorporated in the unit endorsement associated with an APS or ACS rating.

National conversion report
The National conversion report is a document on the basis of which prior training may be recognized as a basis for the issuing of a student air traffic controller licence. It contains:

a description of the national requirements for issuing military air traffic controller licenses and the scope of associated privileges
information for which requirements of Annex I (requirements for the licensing of air traffic controllers) credit is to be given
information about the additional training necessary (including examinations and assessments)
a statement confirming that the compliance with the training, examination and assessment requirements can be considered as being equivalent to the successful completion of the initial training
copies of all relevant supporting documentation

A holder of a national military air traffic controller licence may apply for the conversion into a student air traffic controller licence. The competent authority gives credit to the applicant for compliance with the requirements of Annex I in accordance with the national conversion report.
Changes to Annex I (requirements for the licensing of air traffic controllers)

When a controller is to exercise the privileges of a unit endorsement in a Member State with a different competent authority, they are to request a change of the competent authority. The applicant must fulfil the language proficiency requirements of that Member State. Situations where the applicant is a student air traffic controller or when only synthetic training device instructor or assessor privileges are exercised are exceptions to these rules. 
The medical certificate is not required when exercising instructor or assessor privileges in a synthetic training device environment, including during Pre-OJT phase.
The changes related to ratings and rating endorsements are described in detail.
The demonstration of language proficiency can be done through a method of assessment approved by '''any''' competent authority.
Revalidation of an OJTI endorsement no longer requires the exercising of privileges for the two preceding years. 
The 2 years' experience requirement for exercising the STDI privileges may be shortened to not less than 1 year by the competent authority when requested by the training organisation.
The unit training may start after successful completion of the initial training. A student air traffic controller license (or an air traffic controller license) with appropriate rating (and endorsement, if applicable) is required for the OJT phase.
The syllabi for the initial training (basic and the various ratings) are updated by adding, removing and merging topics and subtopics.

Changes to Annex II (requirements for competent authorities)

The option for the competent authority to authorize its personnel to conduct assessments related to unit endorsements is removed.
Facilitating the approval of the assessment method for the demonstration of language proficiency is added to the tasks of the competent authorities.
The evaluation of alternative means of compliance and the related procedures are removed from the competent authorities' tasks. They must, however, notify EASA in case alternative means of compliance are used.
Added provisions for the processes associated with the change of competent authority. In general:

The license holder applies for a change of competent authority
The receiving (new) competent authority requests relevant documents from the transferring (previous) competent authority
The license holder surrenders the license and medical certificate to the receiving competent authority
The receiving competent authority exchanges the license and the medical certificate. The new license includes all ratings, rating endorsements, licence endorsements and valid unit endorsements
The receiving competent authority notifies the transferring competent authority that the process is complete. Until that notification is received, the transferring competent authority remains responsible for the license and medical certificate.


The provisions for the certification of training organizations are expanded:

The competent authority may require audits, inspections or assessments before issuing the certificate
The certificate is issued with an unlimited duration and contains all approved activities
A certificate is not issued in case there is an open level 1 finding. 


The provisions for dealing with findings are expanded:

The competent authority decides what enforcement measures are appropriate based on the risk posed by the training organisation’s non-compliance
A new example of level 1 finding is provided: providing training in a way which introduces a significant risk to flight safety
For cases not requiring the issue of level 1 and 2 findings, the competent authority may issue observations


The format of (student) air traffic controller license is updated.

Changes to Annex III (requirements for air traffic controller training organisations and aero-medical centres)

The corrective action plan developed to correct a finding must be accepted by the competent authority.
Training organizations providing on-the-job training must establish and maintain an occurrence-reporting system, including mandatory and voluntary reporting. Any safety-related event or condition resulting from their training activity must be reported. Special provisions for training organisations not established in a Member State and providing on-the-job training in the territory to which the Treaties apply are defined in this regard.

Entry into Force
This Regulation entered into force in May 2023 and is applicable as of August 2024.
Regulation 2023/893 amending Regulation 2015/340 (OJ, 04.05.2023)
Related Regulations

Regulation 2015/340
Regulation 2018/1139
Regulation 2017/373

Further  Reading
European Commission

EUR-Lex Portal: Regulation 2023/893 (available in different languages and file formats)





Categories


Single European Sky,
              SES Implementing Rules,
              ATM Operations Training BP












Feedback