ES2 2020











  ES2 2020









Article Information

Category:



General 








Content source:




 SKYbrary





 









Content control:




 SKYbrary





 















This year's edition of the Experience Sharing to Enhance Safety comprised two big workshops, having Just Culture as the central theme. The first workshop was entitled Just Culture - Aviation and Judiciary Online Days and the second one was the annual Just Culture Conference, entitled Just Culture Across Industries: Continuing to Learn From Each Other.
Go back to all editions of ES2 Meetings
Just Culture - Aviation and Judiciary Online Days

Given the global COVID-19 pandemic, the fourth national Spanish workshop on Just Culture 2020 was held online, on the Zoom platform and was structured into two webinars, one on the 1st of October and the other one 2nd of October. Co-organised by APROCTA, ENAIRE, COPAC and Eurocontrol, it consisted of two half days online presentations and interactions on Ethics & Safety topics.
This workshop on Just Culture was organised in two different days. The presentations and the deliverables are structured below, in the Day 1 and Day 2 sections.
Day 1

Agenda of the ES2 2020 edition
Safety & Ethics: Where Does Safety End and Ethics Begin? presenation by Tony Licu, EUROCONTROL
Etica en Control Aereo presentation by Marc Baumgartner, IFATCA
Resumen Ejecutivo Accidente ERJ190-100XA-GAL Aeropuerto de Durango,México document created by Juan Carlos Lozano


Day 2

Ética y Buenas Practicas en la Investigacion de Accidentes y los Procesos Judiciales: ¿Un Punto de Encuentro? presentation by Irene Nadal Gómez & Diego Olmedo de Cáceres
Ética y Deontología en la Aviación Comercial presentation by Emilio Martínez Navarro

Just Culture Conference
Just Culture Across Industries: Continuing to Learn From Each Other

Almost every year one Just Culture Conference is organised in a European Capital in which safety people from aviation, railway, maritime, healthcare and judiciary jointly discuss the concept of Just Culture. After Istanbul 2012, Amsterdam 2014, Lisbon 2016, Rome 2017, Bucharest 2018, this year because of COVID19 situation the Just Culture Conference planned to take place in Giardini di Naxos, Sicily/Italy has turned into a series of online webinars.
The “divide” between international safety rules and national law pertaining to civil and criminal liabilities has too long been blamed for the difficulties encountered in the safety aviation domain. It was the cause of an almost complete absence of communication, let alone cooperation, between the aviation safety experts and the national prosecutors. The Just Culture approach respects those limits and explores the - promising – solutions of educating both parties and building trust and understanding towards exercising their tasks in recognition of their mutual responsibilities for balancing safety and the administration of justice. Under the Just Culture principles grossly negligent or intentional criminal behaviour should be punished; but not so for “honest mistakes”. The 4 webinars are offering a platform to discuss judiciary view, the front line operators view, the Organisations and academics view.
27th of October - Webinar 1 - Just Culture in Practice Part 1
The recording of this webinar can be accessed here.
The presentations from the webinar 1 are listed below:

Day 1 Agenda of the Just Culture Across Industries: Continuing to Learn From Each Other
Overzealous Criminalization: Adverse Effects on Safety? presentation by Cristopher Hart, Former Chairman of the US National Transportation Safety Board
Mind Your Mind-set: The Psychology of Judgement for the Judiciary presentation by Steven Shorrock
The Psychology of Judgement-Integrated Final the presentation results
Just Culture Manifesto presentation by Tony Licu
Just Culture Manifesto Presentation Results


28th of October - Webinar 2 - Just Culture Front Line Operators Perspective
The recording of this webinar can be found here.
The presentations form the webinar 2 are listed below:

Agenda Day 2
Implementing Just Culture in the Swiss Legal System: A dream or a Real Opportunity? presentation by Robin Gurt
Re-connecting presentation by Rudy Pont
Just Culture from Other Continents – The Just Culture Journey at Delta Air Lines and Aeromexico presentation by Trish DeMasi
Just Culture Policy - ENAV Approach presentation by Volpini Salvestrini
The Criminal Liability of Air Traffic Controllers within the Criminal Negligence Framework presentation by Nicola Romano and Eliana Greco


29th of October - Webinar 3 - Organisations Point of View
The recording of this webinar can be found here.
The presentations form the webinar 3 are listed below:

Agenda Day 3
Just Culture Updates presentation by Tony Licu & Federico Franchina
The European Railway Safety Culture Model: Theory and Practice presentation by Dr. Grégory Rolina
Enforcement Decision Making on the UK Railway presentation by Paul Appleton
ICAO Provisions on the Protection of Accident/Incident Investigation Records presentation by Arnaud Desjardin

17th of November - Webinar 4 - Just Culture in Healthcare
The recording of this webinar can be found here. The presentations form the webinar 4 are listed below:

Joshua's Story presentation by Harmed Patients Alliance
Just Culture in Healthcare presentation by Prof. Suzette Woodward

Go back to all editions of ES2 Meetings




Categories


General












Feedback