Reduced Lateral Separation Minimum (RLatSM)











  Reduced Lateral Separation Minimum (RLatSM)









Article Information

Category:



General 








Content source:




 SKYbrary





 









Content control:




 SKYbrary





 















Description
Reduced Lateral Separation Minimum (RLatSM) is the implementation of 25nm lateral separation standards in North Atlantic High Level Airspace (HLA) (Minimum Navigation Performance Airspace (MNPS)) for qualified aircraft flying within the Organised Track System (OTS).
Background
Advancements in aircraft avionics, flight management system (FMS) / navigation system accuracy and ATM flight data processing capability fueled an initiative to evaluate if the North Atlantic lateral separation standard of one degree of latitude (nominally 60nm) could be reduced to increase the number of possible route options and thus increase airspace capacity at optimum flight levels. Changes under RLatSM reduce the minimum lateral separation to 25nm, practical achievement of which is accomplished by separating adjacent tracks by one-half-degree of latitude.
Implementation
RLatSM is being implemented using a phased approach, the first phase of which began in late 2015. Phase 1 introduced one-half-degree spacing by inserting an additional track midway between the two existing core tracks of the NAT Organised Track System (OTS) from flight level (FL) 350 to FL 390 inclusive. Phase 2, when implemented, is anticipated to expand RLatSM throughout the entire NAT OTS.
Eligibility
All RLatSM tracks and FLs will be uniquely identified in Note 3 of the REMARKS section of the OTS Track Message. Only those operators/aircraft eligible for RLatSM operations will be allowed to operate on designated RLatSM tracks between FL 350 and FL 390 (inclusive).
To be eligible to flight plan RLatSM tracks, operators must be:

Required Navigation Performance (RNP) 4 approved

and the aircraft must be equipped with both:

Controller Pilot Data Link Communications (CPDLC) and
Automatic Dependent Surveillance - Contract (ADS-C)

Contingency
Contingency procedures as described in the North Atlantic Operations and Airspace Manual (NAT Doc 007) are unchanged for RLatSM track spacing. Additionally, Strategic Lateral Offset Procedures (SLOP)) are authorised and encouraged.
Related Articles

North Atlantic Operations - Airspace
North Atlantic Operations - Organised Track System
North Atlantic Operations - Contingency
Strategic Lateral Offset

Further Reading
NAV Canada

Aeronautical Information Circular 25/15 - Gander Flight Information Region (FIR)/Control Area (CTA) Airspace Design Changes for Reduced Lateral Separation Minimum Implementation
Aeronautical Information Circular 26/15 - Trial Implementation of 25 Nautical Mile Lateral Separation Minimum in the ICAO North Atlantic Region

ICAO

Doc 007 - North Atlantic Operations and Airspace Manual

UK NATS

Don't Let SLOP Slip Your Mind; Karen Bolton





Categories


General












Feedback