Contingency Strategies











  Contingency Strategies









Article Information

Category:



ANS Contingency Planning







Content source:




 SKYbrary





 









Content control:




 SKYbrary





 















Definition
Contingency strategies describe the specific measures that an air navigation service provider (ANSP) will have put in place in order to prepare for adverse contingencies that might affect future operations, in line with their overall contingency policy.
Objective
A variety of air navigation services (ANS) contingency strategies are available to help ANSPs move away from the high level abstraction of the Contingency Lifecycle and the Operational Concept towards more detailed planning of contingency measures.
Description
Various contingency strategies have been identified following site visits to a number of European Civil Aviation Conference (ECAC) ANSPs and provide insights of what ANSPs are currently planning to do or have already done to prepare themselves for contingency operations. Typically, the strategies are classified as either 'alternate airspace' strategies or 'alternate location' strategies and include:

ATS Delegation.
Contingency Flight Level Allocation Scheme (cFLAS)
Procedural Control
Co-located facilities.
Multi-Use facilities.
Centralised facilities.

It is stressed that the strategies listed above are not mutually exclusive and it may be necessary to use several different approaches or combinations of approaches to meet ANSPs' needs.
Related Articles

Contingency Planning
Policy on Contingency
Operational Concept for Contingency

Further Reading

For further information on Contingency Planning see the EUROCONTROL, Guidelines for Contingency Planning for Air Navigation Services (including Service Continuity) In particular, Appendix C.
Current Practices for Contingency in ATM Five of the most used Contingency Architectures are described in this presentation by Professor Chris Johnson, University of Glasgow.


See also the EUROCONTROL Reference Guide to EUROCONTROL Guidelines for Contingency Planning





Categories


ANS Contingency Planning












Feedback