Regulation 2015/1018 - Occurrences in Civil Aviation to Be Mandatorily Reported











  Regulation 2015/1018 - Occurrences in Civil Aviation to Be Mandatorily Reported









Article Information

Category:



Rules 








Content source:




 SKYbrary





 









Content control:




 SKYbrary





 















Description
Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) 2015/1018 of 29 June 2015 lays down a list classifying occurrences in civil aviation to be mandatorily reported according to Regulation (EU) No 376/2014 of the European Parliament and of the Council.
Relation with Regulation (EU) No 376/2014
Regulation (EU) No 376/2014 deals with the reporting, analysis and follow-up of occurrences in civil aviation. The aim of Regulation (EU) No 376/2014 is to improve aviation safety by ensuring that relevant safety information relating to civil aviation is reported, collected, stored, protected, exchanged, disseminated and analysed.
Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) 2015/1018 of 29 June 2015 provides for the categorisation and listing of aviation safety occurrences to be reported pursuant to Regulation (EU) No 376/2014.
List and Classification of Occurrences
The detailed classification to be referred to when reporting occurrences, through mandatory reporting systems, pursuant to regulation (EU) No 376/2014 is set out in Annexes I to V to Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) 2015/1018.
Annexes I, III, IV and V are structured so that the pertinent occurrences are linked with categories of activities during which they are normally observed, according to experience, in order to facilitate reporting. However, the regulation requires that such a structure does not mean that occurrences must not be reported in case they take place outside the operational category to which they are linked in the list.
Annex I: Occurrences Related to the Operation of the Aircraft
The reportable occurrences are categorised as follows:

Air operations. This category includes reportable occurrences categorised according to the operational phase of occurrence:

Flight preparation;
Aircraft preparation;
Take-off and landing;
Any phase of flight;
Other types of occurrences.


Technical occurrences.This category includes airworthiness related reportable occurrences:

Structure and systems;
Propulsion (including engines, propellers and rotor systems) and auxiliary power units (APUs);


Interaction with air navigation services (ANS) and air traffic management (ATM). This category includes ANS and ATM interaction related reportable occurrences such as unsafe ATC clearance and prolonged loss of communication with ATS.
Emergencies and other critical situations. This category includes reportable occurrences related to emergency and other critical situations such as any event leading to the declaration of emergency and the use of any emergency equipment or non-normal procedure affecting in-flight or landing performance.
External environment and meteorology. This category includes reportable occurrences related to the outer environment and meteorology such as a collision or a near collision on the ground or in the air, with another aircraft, terrain or obstacle, the unexpected encounter of poor runway surface conditions and wake-turbulence encounters.
Security. This category includes reportable occurrences related to security and namely a bomb threat or hijack, difficulty in controlling intoxicated, violent or unruly passengers and the discovery of a stowaway.

Annex II: Occurrences Related to Technical Conditions, Maintenance and Repair of the Aircraft
The reportable occurrences are categorised as follows:
1. Manufacturing
This category broadly includes products, parts or appliances released from the production organisation with deviations from applicable design data that could lead to a potential unsafe condition as identified with the holder of the type-certificate or design approval.
2. Design
This category broadly includes any failure, malfunction, defect or other occurrence related to a product, part, or appliance which has resulted in or may result in an unsafe condition. This category is applicable to occurrences occurring on a product, part, or appliance covered by the type- certificate, restricted type-certificate, supplemental type-certificate, ETSO authorisation, major repair design approval or any other relevant approval deemed to have been issued under Commission Regulation (EU) No 748/2012 on initial airworthiness.
3. Maintenance and continuing airworthiness management
This category includes failures, malfunctions, defects, damages, incorrect maintenance data and other occurrences experienced or discovered during maintenance and continuing airworthiness management tasks.
Annex III: Occurrences Related to Air Navigation Services and Facilities
The reportable occurrences are categorised as follows:
1. Aircraft-related occurrences
This category includes reportable aircraft-related occurrences such as a collision or a near collision on the ground or in the air, between an aircraft and another aircraft, terrain or obstacle, including near-controlled flight into terrain (near CFIT), separation minima infringement and inadequate separation.
2. Degradation or total loss of services or functions
This category includes reportable occurrences related to the degradation or total loss of services or functions such as the inability to provide ATM services or to execute ATM functions and the failure of communication or surveillance service.
3. Other occurrences
This category includes other air navigation services and facilities reportable occurrences such as the declaration of an emergency, fuel dumping and bomb threat or hijack.
Annex IV: Occurrences Related to Aerodromes and Ground Services
The reportable occurrences are categorised as follows:

Safety management of an aerodrome. This category includes reportable occurrences related to the safety management of an aerodrome and are further categorised as follows:

Aircraft- and obstacle-related occurrences;
Degradation or total loss of services or functions;
Other occurrences.


Ground handling of an aircraft. This category includes reportable occurrences related to aircraft ground handling and are further categorised as follows:

Aircraft- and aerodrome-related occurrences;
Degradation or total loss of services or functions;
Ground handling specific occurrences.



Annex V: Occurrences Related to Aircraft Other than Complex Motor-Powered Aircraft, Including Sailplanes and Lighter-than-Air Vehicles
This annex includes reportable occurrences related to aircraft other than complex motor-powered aircraft, including sailplanes and lighter-than-air vehicles, that are categorised as follows:

Aircraft other than complex motor-powered aircraft excluding sailplanes and lighter-than-air vehicles;
Sailplanes (gliders); and
Lighter-than-air vehicles (balloons and airships).


Under each of all the above categories the reportable occurrences are further categorised as follows:

Air operations;
Technical occurrences;
Interaction with air navigation services and air traffic management;
Emergencies and other critical situations;
External environment and meteorology.

Entry into force
Regulation (EU) 2015/1018 entered into force on 20 July 2015 and became applicable from 15 November 2015. The regulation is binding in its entirety and directly applicable in all EU Member States.
Related articles

Mandatory Occurrence Reporting
Regulation 376/2014 - Reporting, Analysis and Follow-Up of Occurrences in Civil Aviation
Safety Occurrence Reporting
Voluntary Occurrence Reporting

Further reading
ICAO

ICAO Annex 13 - Aircraft Accident and Incident Investigation
ICAO Doc 9859 - Safety Management Manual, Third Edition 2013

EU

Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) 2015/1018 of 29 June 2015
Regulation (EU) No 376/2014 of 3 April 2014





Categories


Rules












Feedback