Hindsight 32











  Hindsight 32









Article Information

Category:



General 








Content source:




 EUROCONTROL





 









Content control:




 SKYbrary





 
















Download the full HindSight 32 magazine here
Published in July 2021, HindSight 32 focused on the theme of The new reality.
Welcome
Welcome to issue 32 of EUROCONTROL’s HindSight magazine, the magazine on human and organisational factors in operations, in air traffic management and beyond. This issue concerns ‘the new reality’ that we are facing. It includes a wide variety of articles from front-line staff and specialists in safety, human factors, psychology, aeromedical, and human and organisational performance in aviation. There are also insights from healthcare, shipping, rail, community development and psychotherapy. The articles reflect how many stakeholders have adjusted and adapted, and the implications of the new reality, for individuals, operational teams, support teams, management, organisations (including operators and service providers), regulators, and intergovernmental aviation organisations. What is clear is that the pandemic has affected everyone. The importance of resilience for individuals, groups, organisations and whole sectors has become more apparent than ever, along with the need for mutual support to get through the crisis.
HindSight 32 Articles
Foreword

Foreword, by Tony Licu.
Invited foreword: NATS, by Martin Rolfe.

Editorial

Navigating the new reality, by Steven Shorrock.

Op-ed

Making it easy for people to do the right thing, by Immanuel Barshi.

The Long Read

A global aeromedical perspective on the new reality, an interview with ICAO’s Ansa Jordaan, by Steven Shorrock.

From Research to Practice

The way we do things around here: Conversations about norms, Robert de Boer.

Views from the Ground

Should we throw ATM out with the bathwater?, by Anders Ellerstrand.
Vaccination strategies and ATCO preparedness for traffic recovery in European air navigation service providers, by Stijn de Graaff.
The day that turned into a year, by Courtney Jaeger and Rhian Williams-Skingley.
Online teaching and facilitation: Lessons from experience, by Ceca Bunjevac and Steven Shorrock.
Human and organisational factors challenges and opportunities for ANSPs
Human and organisational factors Q&A: Remote towers, by Osman Saafan and colleagues.

Views from the Air

Fatigue and currency: How more down time may increase risk this summer, by Katy Lee.
Back in the saddle: Adjustments to the new reality of work at American Airlines, by Bogomir Glavan.
Marginal gains in safety, wellbeing and performance at Cathay, by Pete McCarthy.
French safety study on the low activity period, by DSAC Safety Management Coordination Team.

Human Performance in The Spotlight

Underload, by Mark Young.

EUROCONTROL updates

Key EUROCONTROL Publications 
Update on EUROCONTROL Safety Team and Subgroups 

Views from Elsewhere

A surgeon’s take on human and organisational factors, a conversation with Manoj Kumar.
Adjusting to major life changes, by Stephen Joseph and Steven Shorrock.
The seven habits of highly connected people, by Cormac Russell.
Why won’t workers speak up? The difference between psychological safety and trust, by Nippin Anand.

Just Culture

Just Culture Manifesto

Register to Receive Your Copy of HindSight Magazine
Register here for a copy of HindSight magazine to be sent to you by post or email every time a new edition is published
See all editions of HindSight magazine




Categories


General












Feedback