Clear Air Turbulence (CAT)











  Clear Air Turbulence (CAT)









Article Information

Category:



Weather 








Content source:




 SKYbrary





 









Content control:




 SKYbrary





 















Definition
Clear Air Turbulence (CAT) is defined as sudden severe turbulence occurring in cloudless regions that causes violent buffeting of aircraft. CAT is a higher altitude turbulence (normally above 15,000 ft) particularly between the core of a jet stream and the surrounding air. This includes turbulence in cirrus clouds, within and in the vicinity of standing lenticular clouds and, in some cases, in clear air in the vicinity of thunderstorms. Generally, though, CAT definitions exclude turbulence caused by thunderstorms, low-altitude temperature inversions,thermals, strong surface winds, or local terrain features. [Source: FAA Aviation Weather Handbook]
Description
There are two types of CAT:

Mechanical. Disruption to the smooth horizontal flow of air.
Thermal. Turbulence caused by vertical currents of air in an unstable atmosphere.

Common causes and sources of CAT are:

Jet Stream. A Jet Stream is a narrow, fast moving current of air, normally close to the Tropopause and generated as a result of the temperature gradient between air masses. Although not all jet streams have CAT associated with them, there can be significant vertical and horizontal Wind Shear on the edges of the jet stream giving rise to sometimes severe clear air turbulence. Any CAT is strongest on the cold side of the jet stream where the wind shear is greatest. In the vicinity of a jet stream, CAT can be encountered anywhere from 7,000 feet below to about 3,000 feet above the tropopause. Because the strong vertical and horizontal wind shear occurs over short distances, this jet stream related CAT tends to be shallow and patchy so a descent or climb of as little as 2,000 feet is often enough to exit the turbulence.
Terrain. High ground disturbs the horizontal flow of air over it, causing turbulence. The severity of the turbulence depends on the strength of the air flow, the roughness of the terrain, the rate of change and curvature of contours, and the elevation of the high ground above surrounding terrain. For further information, refer to the article entitled Mountain Waves.
Thunderstorm Complexes. Cumulonimbus (Cb) cells have strong vertical currents. Aircraft passing within 20 nautical miles horizontally, or less than 5,000 feet above the top, of a Cb may encounter CAT.

Effects

Structural Damage. Aircraft can suffer structural damage as a result of encountering severe clear air turbulence. In extreme cases this can lead to the break-up of the aircraft. In even moderate turbulence, damage can occur to fittings within the aircraft, especially as a result of collision with unrestrained items of cargo or passenger luggage. Prolonged exposure to turbulence will shorten the fatigue life of the aircraft.
Physical Injury to Crew/Passengers. If caught unaware, passengers and crew moving around in the aircraft cabin can be injured. In one case, where a B747 encountered CAT over the Pacific ocean, several passengers and crew were severely injured and one passenger subsequently died.
Impaired Flight Crew Performance. Moderate or Severe turbulence can make simple tasks, including reading instruments, near impossible.

Defences

Awareness. SIGMET charts give forecasts of the location and level of clear air turbulence. Information on local terrain induced CAT may be contained in appropriate Aeronautical Information Publications (AIPs) e.g. Approach plates for Gibraltar contain information on turbulence to be expected for given wind directions.
Restraint Systems. Passengers and crew should fit seat belts and harnesses when seated to protect them in the event of unforeseen turbulence.

Scenarios
An aircraft descending for an approach into Milan encounters moderate turbulence associated with a southerly airflow over the Alps. A member of the cabin crew checking the security of the cabin falls breaking an arm.
Solutions

Slow down. Reducing the aircraft speed reduces the risk of structural damage and reduces vibration making instruments easier to read.
Strap in. Notify the crew/illuminate seat belt sign. All passengers and crew should immediately sit down and fit seat belts/harnesses.
Switch on Engine Ignition - Certain aircraft types recommend turning ignition on to prevent the turbulent airflow from flaming out engines.
Inform ATC. Notify ATC/warn other aircraft on chat or guard/emergency frequency (121.5 or 243.0). Request clearance to climb/descend or diverge from track to escape turbulence.
Assess Damage/Injuries. Carry out a damage assessment and ascertain condition of any injured passengers. Consider precautionary diversion.
Suspend Cabin Service. Obviously the serving of hot drinks and meals during turbulent conditions puts both cabin crew and passengers at risk.

Accidents and Incidents
Clear Air Turbulence encounter


B738, en-route, south southwest of Toulouse France, 2015On 25 February 2015, a Boeing 737-800 encountered severe clear air turbulence as it crossed the Pyrenees northbound at FL 380. Two of the four cabin crew sustained serious injuries and it was decided to divert to Bordeaux where the flight arrived 35 minutes later. The turbulence and its consequences were attributed to the flight’s lateral and vertical closeness to a correctly forecast opposite-direction jet stream core and specifically to allowing cabin service to commence despite being near the boundary associated with severe turbulence following a negative ATC response when asked whether other flights had reported severe turbulence.

A359, vicinity Cayenne French Guiana, 2021On 5 December 2021, an Airbus A359-900 crew encountered a very brief episode of unexpected clear air turbulence associated with visible signs of convective weather in the vicinity. Not having had prior warning, the senior cabin crew member fell and was seriously injured. The investigation concluded that the risk of turbulence prevailing for the location and season as the end of daylight approached was greater than perceived by the pilots, despite their familiarity with the local area and its weather. The investigation further concluded that releasing the cabin crew from their previously secured positions had been inappropriate.

A320, en-route, near Okayama Japan, 2022On 16 January 2022, an Airbus A320 in cruise unexpectedly and very briefly encountered light clear air turbulence. Despite being secured in a seat, one passenger sustained a serious injury not assessed as such by the passenger or the cabin crew at the time, but which subsequently resulted in hospitalisation with a broken rib. The minor turbulence encountered had included a lateral movement which caused firm impact with the seat armrest. The operators’ response included amending the safety briefing and related procedures and introducing a new video on turbulence awareness to be shown immediately after the briefing.

AT45, en-route, north northwest of Tanegashima Japan, 2019On 12 October 2019, an ATR 42-500 on which Captain upgrade line training was being conducted encountered mild clear air turbulence soon after descent began and despite setting flight idle power, a concurrent speed increase led to concern at a possible VMO exceedence. An abrupt and ultimately simultaneous manual increase in pitch attitude followed leading to serious injury to the unsecured cabin crew which rendered them unfit to work. The Investigation found that the upset - a change in pitch from -2.3° to +6.3°in one second - was almost entirely due to pitch input from both pilots rather than turbulence.

B773, en-route, west of Haifa Israel, 2021On 17 January 2021, a Boeing 777-300 which had just begun descent into Beirut encountered unexpected moderate to severe clear air turbulence which resulted in one major and several minor injuries to unsecured occupants including cabin crew. The Investigation found that the flight crew had acted in accordance with all applicable procedures on the basis of information available to them but noted that the operator’s flight watch system had failed to generate and communicate a message about a relevant SIGMET until after the severe turbulence episode due to a data processing issue not identified as representing an operational safety risk.


...further results


Turbulence Injury - Cabin Crew


B738, en-route, south southwest of Toulouse France, 2015On 25 February 2015, a Boeing 737-800 encountered severe clear air turbulence as it crossed the Pyrenees northbound at FL 380. Two of the four cabin crew sustained serious injuries and it was decided to divert to Bordeaux where the flight arrived 35 minutes later. The turbulence and its consequences were attributed to the flight’s lateral and vertical closeness to a correctly forecast opposite-direction jet stream core and specifically to allowing cabin service to commence despite being near the boundary associated with severe turbulence following a negative ATC response when asked whether other flights had reported severe turbulence.

A359, vicinity Cayenne French Guiana, 2021On 5 December 2021, an Airbus A359-900 crew encountered a very brief episode of unexpected clear air turbulence associated with visible signs of convective weather in the vicinity. Not having had prior warning, the senior cabin crew member fell and was seriously injured. The investigation concluded that the risk of turbulence prevailing for the location and season as the end of daylight approached was greater than perceived by the pilots, despite their familiarity with the local area and its weather. The investigation further concluded that releasing the cabin crew from their previously secured positions had been inappropriate.

B738, west southwest of Barcelona Spain, 2021On 31 July 2021, a Boeing 737-800 descending through an area of convective activity which was subject to a current SIGMET encountered some anticipated moderate turbulence whilst visually deviating around storm cells without reducing speed. When it appeared possible that the maximum speed may be exceeded because of turbulence, the autopilot was disconnected and a severe pitch up and then down immediately followed resulting in serious injuries to two of the four cabin crew and a passenger. This disconnection was contrary to the aircraft operator’s procedures and to the explicit training received by the pilot involved who was in command.

B738, en-route, near Cuneo northwest Italy, 2021On 25 July 2021, a Boeing 737-800 which had previously been manoeuvring visually around storm cells over the Alps during the initial descent into Nice turned back on track believing the avoidance action was complete but was then unable to avoid penetrating a further cell during which severe turbulence caused a serious injury to one of the cabin crew and a lesser injury to another. Multiple aircraft in the area had been simultaneously requesting track deviations at the time with ATC displays not showing weather returns. In the absence of plans to introduce this, a corresponding safety recommendation was made.

B773, en-route, west of Haifa Israel, 2021On 17 January 2021, a Boeing 777-300 which had just begun descent into Beirut encountered unexpected moderate to severe clear air turbulence which resulted in one major and several minor injuries to unsecured occupants including cabin crew. The Investigation found that the flight crew had acted in accordance with all applicable procedures on the basis of information available to them but noted that the operator’s flight watch system had failed to generate and communicate a message about a relevant SIGMET until after the severe turbulence episode due to a data processing issue not identified as representing an operational safety risk.


...further results


Pax Turbulence Injury - Seat Belt Signs on


B738, west southwest of Barcelona Spain, 2021On 31 July 2021, a Boeing 737-800 descending through an area of convective activity which was subject to a current SIGMET encountered some anticipated moderate turbulence whilst visually deviating around storm cells without reducing speed. When it appeared possible that the maximum speed may be exceeded because of turbulence, the autopilot was disconnected and a severe pitch up and then down immediately followed resulting in serious injuries to two of the four cabin crew and a passenger. This disconnection was contrary to the aircraft operator’s procedures and to the explicit training received by the pilot involved who was in command.

B773, en-route, west of Haifa Israel, 2021On 17 January 2021, a Boeing 777-300 which had just begun descent into Beirut encountered unexpected moderate to severe clear air turbulence which resulted in one major and several minor injuries to unsecured occupants including cabin crew. The Investigation found that the flight crew had acted in accordance with all applicable procedures on the basis of information available to them but noted that the operator’s flight watch system had failed to generate and communicate a message about a relevant SIGMET until after the severe turbulence episode due to a data processing issue not identified as representing an operational safety risk.

A388, en-route, Bay of Bengal India, 2019On 10 July 2019 an Airbus A380 in the cruise at night at FL 400 encountered unexpectedly severe turbulence approximately 13 hours into the 17 hour flight and 27 occupants were injured as a result, one seriously. The detailed Investigation concluded that the turbulence had occurred in clear air in the vicinity of a significant area of convective turbulence and a jet stream. A series of findings were related to both better detection of turbulence risks and ways to minimise injuries if unexpectedly encountered with particular reference to the aircraft type and operator but with wider relevance.

B738, en-route, west of Bar Montenegro, 2019On 13 February 2019, a Boeing 737-800 en-route over the southern Adriatic Sea unexpectedly encountered severe clear air turbulence and two unsecured cabin crew and some unsecured passengers were thrown against the cabin structure and sustained minor injuries. The Investigation found that the Captain had conducted the crew pre-flight briefing prior to issue of the significant weather chart applicable to their flight by which time severe turbulence due to mountain waves at right angles to an established jetstream not shown on the earlier chart used for the briefing was expected at a particular point on their route.

B788, vicinity Amritsar India, 2018On 19 April 2018, a Boeing 787-8 suddenly encountered a short period of severe turbulence as it climbed from FL160 towards clearance limit FL 190 during a weather avoidance manoeuvre which had taken it close to the Amritsar overhead and resulted in a level bust of 600 feet, passenger injuries and minor damage to cabin fittings. The Investigation found that the flight had departed during a period of adverse convective weather after the crew had failed to download a pre flight met briefing or obtain and review available weather updates.


...further results


Pax Turbulence Injury - Seat Belt Signs off


A320, en-route, near Okayama Japan, 2022On 16 January 2022, an Airbus A320 in cruise unexpectedly and very briefly encountered light clear air turbulence. Despite being secured in a seat, one passenger sustained a serious injury not assessed as such by the passenger or the cabin crew at the time, but which subsequently resulted in hospitalisation with a broken rib. The minor turbulence encountered had included a lateral movement which caused firm impact with the seat armrest. The operators’ response included amending the safety briefing and related procedures and introducing a new video on turbulence awareness to be shown immediately after the briefing.

A388, en-route, north northeast of Beira Mozambique, 2020On 16 January 2020 an Airbus A380 in the cruise at FL 400 in an area of correctly forecast convective turbulence encountered severe turbulence not anticipated by the crew who had not put on the seatbelt signs or alerted the cabin crew in time for the cabin to be secured. An unsecured passenger was seriously injured and several other passengers and an unsecured member of cabin crew were lifted off their feet but managed to avoid injury. The Investigation concluded that the flight crew had not made full use of the capabilities of the available on board weather radar equipment.

B788, en-route, Chengde China, 2019On 15 August 2019, a Boeing 787 descending towards destination Beijing received ATC approval for convective weather avoidance but this was then modified with both a new track requirement and a request to descend which diminished its effectiveness. A very brief encounter with violent turbulence followed but as the seat belt signs had not been proactively switched on, the cabin was not secured and two passengers sustained serious injuries and two cabin crew sustained minor injuries. The Investigation noted that weather deviation requests could usefully be accompanied by an indication of how long they were required for.

A388, en-route, Wyoming USA, 2020On 2 February 2020, an Airbus A380 in the cruise at night at FL 330 encountered unforecast clear air turbulence with the seatbelt signs off and one unsecured passenger in a standard toilet compartment sustained a serious injury as a result. The Investigation noted that relevant airline policies and crew training had been in place but also observed a marked difference in the availability of handholds in toilet compartments provided for passengers with disabilities or other special needs and those in all other such compartments and made a corresponding safety recommendation to standardise and placard handhold provision in all toilet compartments.

A346, en-route, northern Turkey, 2019On 21 August 2019, an Airbus A340-600 encountered sudden-onset moderate to severe clear air turbulence whilst in the cruise at FL 360 over northern Turkey which resulted in a serious passenger injury. The Investigation found that the flight was above and in the vicinity of convective clouds exhibiting considerable vertical development but noted that neither the en-route forecast nor current alerting had given any indication that significant turbulence was likely to be encountered. It was noted the operator s flight crew had not been permitted to upload weather data in flight but since this event, that restriction had been removed.


...further results


Related Articles

Turbulence
Wake Vortex Turbulence
Jet Stream
Mountain Waves
Ellrod Index

Further Reading

Aviation Weather Handbook, FAA-H-8083-28, Federal Aviation Administration, 25 Nov. 2022.
FAA AC 00-30C: Clear Air Turbulence Avoidance, March 2016 (AC has been cancelled but is still valuable resource).
Incidents in Air Transport No 5 - Wind Gradients and Turbulence, Bureau d’Enquêtes et d’Analyses (BEA), Dec 2006.
Preventing Turbulence-Related Injuries in Air Carrier Operations Conducted Under Title 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 121, NTSB (USA), August 2021
JTSB Digests: Digest of Aircraft Accident Analyses For Prevention of Accidents due to the Shaking of the Aircraft, JTSB (Japan), January 2015





Categories


Weather,
              Turbulence,
              Cabin Safety












Feedback