SE051: SOPs for Tow Tug Operators











  SE051: SOPs for Tow Tug Operators









Article Information

Category:



CAST Safety Enhancements 








Content source:




 CAST





 









Content control:




 CAST





 















Status: COMPLETED
Background
This safety enhancement reduces the frequency and severity of runway incursions by developing and implementing recommended best practices for mechanics and others who tow or otherwise move aircraft within the airport movement area.
 
Related Implementation Plan
Detailed Implementation Plan
Related Outputs
The Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) developed two training programs on aircraft taxi procedures and tug and tow procedures. Since preventing runway incursions is one of the top safety goals of the FAA, the Office of Runway Safety, ARI-1, and the Flight Standards Service Aircraft Maintenance Division, AFS-300, have produced interactive CD-ROMs containing the training programs. These CD programs inform mechanics and ramp personnel about important practices for preventing runway incursions, ramp safety practices, proper taxi procedures, and proper tug and tow procedures.
The CDs are:      a. Taxi 101. This training program covers: weather; airport familiarization; runway and taxiway signs, surface markings, and lighting; aircraft preflight; flight deck procedures; and air traffic control procedures.      b. Tug & Tow 101. This training program covers: personal safety; ramp operations and safety; aircraft and engine hazards; communications; push back; aircraft towing; airport signs, surface markings, and weather; and air traffic control procedures.
These CD-ROMs may be obtained free of charge from the FAA by visiting the Office of Runway Safety and clicking on the ordering instructions link. There is an order form available on the FAA's Runway Safety order site. Additional information is available on the Runway Safety page as well. The CD's may also be obtained by writing to:
                Federal Aviation Administration                Office of Runway Safety                ATTN.: AVR/AFS Representative                490 L’Enfant Plaza, Suite 7225                Washington, DC 20024
Related SKYbrary Articles

Runway Incursion
Runway Incursion (OGHFA SE)
Preventing Runway Incursions
ICAO Manual on the Prevention of Runway Incursions





Categories


CAST Safety Enhancements,
              CAST Safety Enhancements Plan












Feedback