Hot semi-arid climate (BSh)











  Hot semi-arid climate (BSh)









Article Information

Category:



Weather 








Content source:




 SKYbrary





 









Content control:




 SKYbrary





 















BWk :  B = Arid  S = Steppe  h = Hot arid
 
Description
Hot semi-arid climates (type "BSh") tend to be located in the 20s and 30s latitudes of the tropics and subtropics, typically in proximity to regions with a tropical savanna or a humid subtropical climate. These climates tend to have hot, sometimes extremely hot, summers and warm to cool winters, with some to minimal precipitation. Hot semi-arid climates are most commonly found around the fringes of subtropical deserts.
Hot semi-arid climates are most commonly found in Africa, Australia and South Asia. In Australia, a large portion of the Outback surrounding the central desert regions lies within the hot semi-arid climate region (e.g. Burketown Airport). In South Asia, both India and sections of Pakistan experience the seasonal effects of monsoons and feature short but well-defined wet seasons, but are not sufficiently wet overall to qualify as a tropical savanna climate.
Hot semi-arid climates can also be found in Europe, primarily in southeast Spain and parts of Greece, Italy Portugal and Cyprus. They are also found in parts of North America, such as Mexico, the ABC Islands, and areas of the Southwestern United States, and sections of South America such as the Gran Chaco, and the poleward side of the arid deserts, where they typically feature a Mediterranean precipitation pattern, with generally rainless summers and wetter winters.
 

Köppen–Geiger climate classification map for Semi-arid, steppe climates - source: wikicommons, authors:  Beck, H.E., Zimmermann, N. E., McVicar, T. R., Vergopolan, N., Berg, A., & Wood, E. F., 2018
Flight safety and planning considerations
High ambient temperatures can have a significant and limiting impact on aircraft and human performance, as well as causes significant maintenance issues. See the related articles on Hot Weather Operations and Hot and High Operations.




Categories


Weather,
              Climate Classification










Köppen Climate Classification (KCC)

Hot Weather Operations














Feedback