SE213: Area Navigation (RNAV) – Safe Operating and Design Practices for STARs and RNAV Departures











  SE213: Area Navigation (RNAV) – Safe Operating and Design Practices for STARs and RNAV Departures









Article Information

Category:



CAST Safety Enhancements 








Content source:




 CAST





 









Content control:




 CAST





 















Status: COMPLETED
Background
The purpose of this Safety Enhancement is to mitigate errors on Standard Terminal Arrival Routes (STARs) and Area Navigation (RNAV) departures, the regulator, the Federal Aviation Administration's Air Traffic Organization (FAA ATO), and industry develop and implement safe operating and design practices for these procedures.
The FAA and industry will collaborate in establishing elements of commonly-accepted safe operating and design practices for flight crews, air traffic service providers, and procedure designers.

FAA, in collaboration with industry, develops guidance to align training for flight crews, training for controllers, and procedure and chart design and implementation. (Output 1)
FAA Flight Standards (AFS), in collaboration with industry, develops commonly-accepted safe operating practices for crews in order to enhance safety on STARs and RNAV departures. Air Carrier training organizations will develop, review and amend training syllabi to emphasize each air carrier’s policies relating to STARs and RNAV departures. (Output 2)
The FAA ATO, with air carrier input, develops commonly-accepted safe operating practices for air traffic control of STARs and RNAV departures. The FAA ATO will develop, review and amend air traffic control training syllabi to incorporate these practices and emphasize policies and procedures relating to STARs and RNAV departures. (Output 3)
The FAA ATO, in collaboration with air carriers and industry aeronautical chart providers, develops and implement guidance for improved procedure design and charting to mitigate operational errors on STARs and RNAV departures. (Output 4)

Related Implementation Plan
Detailed Implementation Plan
Related Outputs
The Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) has developed training videos of safe operating practices for air traffic control of Standard Terminal Arrival Routes (STAR) and area navigation (RNAV) departures and has revised the ATC RNAV procedure guidance in FAA Order JO 7110.65X, Air Traffic Control. This completes Output 3 of the Safety Enhancement.
The FAA has updated STAR/RNAV procedure standards in Orders 8260.3C, United States Standard for Terminal Instrument Procedures (TERPS), and 8260.58A, United States Standard for Performance Based Navigation (PBN) Instrument Procedure Design. This completes Output 4 of the Safety Enhancement.
Related Safety Enhancements

SE212: Area Navigation (RNAV) – Equipment and Procedures to Improve Route Entry for RNAV Departures
SE214: Area Navigation (RNAV) – Procedures and Standards to Improve Path Compliance for STARs and RNAV Departures

Related SKYbrary Articles

Area Navigation Systems
SIDs and STARs





Categories


CAST Safety Enhancements,
              CAST Safety Enhancements Plan












Feedback