Decision on the Nomination of the Network Manager for the ATM Network Functions











  Decision on the Nomination of the Network Manager for the ATM Network Functions









Article Information

Category:



Single European Sky 








Content source:




 SKYbrary





 









Content control:




 EUROCONTROL





 















Note: This Decision nominated EUROCONTROL as the Network Manager up to the end of the second reference period (December 2019) which has expired. In 2019, EUROCONTROL was appointed as Network Manager through Decision 2019/709.
Commission Decision of 7.7.2011 on the nomination of the Network Manager for the air traffic management (ATM) network functions of the single European sky - text of the decision 
Objective
To nominate Eurocontrol as the Network Manager for the ATM network functions (the Network Manager) as referred to in the network functions Regulation for a period starting on the date of notification of the Decision up to the end of the second reference period foreseen in Article 7 of the now repealed performance Regulation (Regulation 691/2010).
Summary
Requirements to the Network Manager
When performing the duties entrusted to it by the present Decision, the Network Manager shall apply the following requirements:

be impartial;
maintain adequate competence;
execute the tasks in a cost-effective manner;
establish the appropriate governance;
avoid conflicts of interest;
comply with the Union legislation relevant for the execution of the functions;
be able to promote the Network Manager concept outside Europe.

Duties of the Network Manager
The Network Manager shall perform the network functions under the conditions defined in the network functions Regulation.
The Network Manager shall facilitate the implementation of the single European sky and in particular shall contribute to the deployment of SESAR according to the European ATM Master Plan.
Network Management Board
Voting members of the Network Management Board shall be designated as follows:

for air navigation service providers: with one representative per FAB;
for commercial and non-commercial civil airspace users and airport operators: among representative organisations at EU level;
for military air navigation service providers and airspace users: among States represented in the Single Sky Committee.

The Network Manager shall be represented by the Director in charge of the network functions in Eurocontrol.
Financing
The Network Manager shall be financed on its own budget, which will be supported by the EU Member States through the Eurocontrol budget.
Relations with Other Organisations and Countries
The Network Manager shall coordinate its participation in the work of international organisations with the Commission to ensure its full alignment with Union policies.
Third countries may participate in the work of the Network Manager from the date of its nomination. Other countries may participate in the work of the Network Manager after that date subject to positive opinion of the Single Sky Committee.
Conditions of Withdrawal
In case of failure to comply with the provisions of the Decision, the Commission may decide to revise or terminate the present nomination with six months prior written notice, subject to positive opinion of the Single Sky Committee.
Entry Into Force
This Decision entered into force in July 2011.
Decision on the Nomination of the Network Manager for the ATM Network Functions
Related articles

Regulation 551/2004 - Organisation and Use of the Airspace in SES
Single European Sky (SES) II

Further Reading
European Commission

Air Transport Portal of the European Commission - Single European Sky





Categories


Single European Sky,
              SES Implementation












Feedback