Hindsight 34











  Hindsight 34









Article Information

Category:



General 








Content source:




 EUROCONTROL





 









Content control:




 SKYbrary





 
















HindSight 34 
Download the full HindSight 34 magazine here
Published in December 2022, HindSight 34 focused on the theme of Handling Surprises: Tales of the Unexpected.
Welcome
Welcome to issue 34 of EUROCONTROL’s HindSight magazine, the magazine on human and organisational factors in operations, in air traffic management and beyond.
This issue is on the theme of Handling Surprises: Tales of the Unexpected. You will find a diverse selection of articles from front-line staff, senior managers, and specialists in operations, human factors, safety, and resilience engineering in the context of aviation, healthcare, maritime, and web operations. The articles reflect surprise handling by individuals, teams and organisations from the perspectives of personal experience, theory, research, and training. 
HindSight magazine emphasises the value of multiple perspectives, and there is often a tension between these. In this zone of tension, we can find much insight as well as reasons for different understandings. There are differences in perspectives within and between researchers, specialists, senior managers and front-line staff. What is surprise and how does it differ from startle, or simply ‘the unexpected’? How do surprises emerge? How can we be prepared to be surprised at individual, team, and organisational levels? How should we respond after surprises? There is rarely one correct answer, and the topic itself is surprising.
In this packed issue, including the online supplement articles, leading voices from the ground and air, and from academia and other industries, share perspectives on these questions. I hope that the articles help you to prepare to be surprised. It is also recommended to review issue 15 of HindSight on Emergency and Unusual Situations in the Air.
Special thanks are extended to the authors and the operational reviewers, who help to ensure that HindSight magazine is relevant, interesting and useful. While the primary readers are operational staff, especially those involved in aviation, it is read much more widely, by different people in different sectors.
We hope that the articles trigger conversations between you and others. Do your operational and non-operational colleagues know about HindSight? Please let them know. Search ‘SKYbrary HindSight’ for all issues, covering a wide variety of themes.
HindSight 34 Articles
Forewords

EUROCONTROL Foreword; "Managing the unexpected", by Tony Licu
Invited Foreword, by Georgi Peev, Director General, BULATSA

Editorial

Surprises, fast and slow: Preparing for the limits of work-as-imagined, by Steven Shorrock

From Research to Practice

On being prepared to be surprised: 20 key insights from David Woods in conversation with Steven Shorrock

Views from the Ground 

The Chicago fire, by Tim Arel
A day when (almost) nothing happened: A personal perspective, by Tom Laursen
“If what you write is correct, we Must shut down our tower”, by Sebastian Daeunert
How one incident changed my approach to handling the unexpected, by Glen Watson
Jet blast: How small changes can lead to big outcomes, by Ulf Henke
Is that the fire alarm? Surprise in the simulator, by Lucy Kirkland
Air con down: Ops room air conditioning system failure, by Francis Bezzina
Human and organisational factors Q&A: Just culture for all, by all, by Lea Sophie Vink

Views from the Air

Surprise and startle, by Captain Ed Pooley
Dispatches from hell: Reflections on surprise and personal resilience, by Dai Whittingham
Three approaches, two go arounds, and one diversion, by Eric Carter and James Norman
Keep calm and reframe: Essential elements of dealing with surprise, by Annemarie Landman, Eric Groen, René van Paassen, Max Mulder
Training for surprises: Research and implementation, by Jeroen Van Rooij and Edzard Boland

Views from Elsewhere

Surprises and survival: Lifeboats and learning, by Adrian Woolrich-Burt
Handling the unexpected: A vascular and trauma surgeon’s perspective, by Mark Edwards
From surprise to normalise: How can we become culturally intelligent?, by Nippin Anand

And Now for Something Completely Different

Work-as-imagined solutioneering: Ten traps along the yellow brick road, by Steven Shorrock

Human Performance in the Spotlight

Human performance in the spotlight: The perceptual cycle model of decision making, by Katie Plant

Diversity and Inclusion

Repositioning inclusion and diversity in ATM, by Milena Bowman

The Long Read 

The day that changed everything: From paralysis to growth. A conversation with Dennie Coumans, by Steven Shorrock and Dennie Coumans 

The Lighter Side 

Cartoons, by Daniel Avram

HindSight 34 On-line Supplement

Surprise! - It's Spring!, by Chad Todd
Surprises in healthcare, by Steven Shorrock

See all editions of HindSight magazine
Subscriptions
Follow this link to subscribe to HindSight




Categories


General












Feedback