S-Band Primary Surveillance Radar: Co-existence issues with 2.6 GHz Transmissions











  S-Band Primary Surveillance Radar: Co-existence issues with 2.6 GHz Transmissions









Article Information

Category:



Safety Reminder Message







Content source:




 EUROCONTROL





 









Content control:




 EUROCONTROL





 















Background Information

European Commission Decision 2008/447/EC of 13 June 2008 obliges EU member states:
"No later than six months after entry into force of this Decision Member States shall designate and subsequently make available, on a non-exclusive basis, the 2,500-2,690 MHz band for terrestrial systems capable of providing electronic ommunications services, in compliance with the parameters set out in the Annex to this Decision"



UK CAA informs in Air Traffic Services Information Notice 168, issued 10 November 2009 that the use of 2.6 GHz Band may result, if no suitable mitigations are in place, in radars that operate in the 2.7 - 3.4 GHz (S-Band) being adversely affected due to their susceptibility to authorised transmissions from within the 2.6 GHz Band. Tests and studies carried out over the last 18 months have confirmed such potential adverse effects.

Your Attention Is Required

Air Navigation Service Providers are invited to review the issue, investigate the relevance for their operational environment and, as appropriate, introduce appropriate mitigation mechanisms.
Aviation Authorities are invited to review the issue and investigate the relevance for their state.

Additional Information

COMMISSION DECISION 2008/447/EC of 13 June 2008 on the harmonisation of the 2 500-2 690 MHz frequency band for terrestrial systems capable of providing electronic communications services in the Community.
UK CAA ATSIN 168 S-Band Primary Surveillance Radar - Co-existence issues with 2.6 GHz Transmissions

Disclaimer
© European Organisation for Safety of Air Navigation (EUROCONTROL) November 2009. This alert is published by EUROCONTROL for information purposes. It may be copied in whole or in part, provided that EUROCONTROL is mentioned as the source and to the extent justified by the non-commercial use (not for sale). The information in this document may not be modified without prior written permission from EUROCONTROL. The use of the document is at the user’s sole risk and responsibility. EUROCONTROL expressly disclaim any and all warranties with respect to any content within the alert, express or implied.




Categories


Safety Reminder Message












Feedback