Hindsight 16











  Hindsight 16









Article Information

Category:



General 








Content source:




 EUROCONTROL





 









Content control:




 SKYbrary





 
















Published in December 2012, HindSight 16 focused on modern aircraft performance.
HindSight 16 Articles

European Networks: An introduction to Hindsight 16 by Joe Sultana, COO of the Network Management Directorate at EUROCONTROL.
The average weight of one elephant and four ants: Editorial by Tzvetomir Blajev.
When the airplane is more technically advanced than you: by Professor Sidney Dekker
Hi Tech!: by Alberto Iovino.
Reversion - The other side of automation: by Captain Ed Pooley
Modern Times : by Eileen Senger.
Modern aircraft performance is not alone: by Maciej Szczukowski.
Case Study - The Plane Spotter: by Bengt Collin.

Comment 1: by Captain Ed Pooley.
Comment 2: by Dragan Milanovski.
Comment 3: by Mike Edwards.
Comment 4: by Anita Duretic Bartolovic
Comment 5: by Dirk De Winter.


Training aircraft performance for modern/future ATC systems: by Dragan Milanovski.
Automation, workload and safety: by Captain Harry Nelson.
Water/Slush on the runway and what every tower controller should know about it: by Gerard van Es.
Blackout: New findings regarding decision-making: by Captain Hans-Joachim Ebermann.
Engine failure on take-off - "Hey, What's it doing now?": by First Officer Sami Laine.
Close interactions of the disconnected kind: by Loukapoulos and Immanuel Barshi.
Unnecessary TCAS RAs caused by high vertical rates before level off: by Stanislaw Drozdowski, Captain Wolfgang Starke, and First Officer Felix Gottwald.
"So what's it doing now?" Training in new technology environment: by Anne Isaac and David Lordl.
Lost in Modernity: by Jean Paries.
Aircraft automation made simple: by Michel Tremaud.

Click here to view other editions of HindSight
Register to Receive Your Copy of HindSight Magazine
Register here for a hardcopy of HindSight magazine to be sent to you by post every time a new edition is published




Categories


General












Feedback