Airmanship











  Airmanship









Article Information

Category:



General 








Content source:




 SKYbrary





 









Content control:




 EUROCONTROL





 















Definition
"Airmanship is the consistent use of good judgment and well-developed skills to accomplish flight objectives. This consistency is founded on a cornerstone of uncompromising flight discipline and is developed through systematic skill acquisition and proficiency. A high state of situational awareness completes the airmanship picture and is obtained through knowledge of one’s self, aircraft, environment, team and risk."[1]
The Foundations of Airmanship
Knowledge
Knowledge of Aircraft
Deep understanding of aircraft sub-systems, emergency procedures, cockpit automation, aircraft flight characteristics and operating limits.
Knowledge of Environment

Understanding the physical environment and the effects on aircraft control.
Understanding the regulatory environment.
Understanding the organisational environment and the challenges posed to airmanship.

Knowledge of Risk
Understanding the risks to discipline, skill and proficiency, knowledge, Situational Awareness, judgement, aircraft, self.
Skills
Physical Skills

Flying skills
Navigation skills
Instrument flying
Emergency handling / recovery
Survival

Flight Deck Management Skills

Avoiding the pitfalls of automation (over-reliance, complacency, bias)
Information management skills

Communication Skills

Vigilance in monitoring communications
Using appropriate communication (phraseology, clear, concise)
Active listening - Inquiry through communications

Cognitive Skills

Understanding and maintaining situational awareness
Problem solving / decision-making skills
Understanding and managing workload
Self-assessment

Team Skills

Performance monitoring
Leadership/initiative
Interpersonal skills
Co-ordination & decision-making
Team communication and SA

Attitudes
Hazardous Attitudes

Understanding the five main hazardous attitudes, the antidotes and the impact on airmanship:


Hazardous Attitudes


Hazardous Attitude
Antidote




Anti-Authority: "The regulations are for someone else")
"Follow the rules. They are that way for a reason."


Impulsivity: "I must act now, there's no time"
"Not so fast. Think first"


Invulnerability: "It won't happen to me"
"It could happen to me"


Macho: "I'll show you. I can do it"
"Taking chances is foolish"


Resignation: "What's the use?"
"Never give up. There is always something I can do"



Self Improvement

Developing the motivation needed for life-long learning
Understanding the requirement for self-assessment in flight.
Developing the will to achieve performance excellence

Discipline in terms of:

Flight Preparation
Flight discipline (e.g. vigilance/look-out, maintaining situational awareness, operational and regulatory policy)
Knowledge and skills maintenance
Post-flight evaluation
Self-discipline (managing stress, managing attitudes)

Related OGHFA Articles

OGHFA Checklist: Elements of Airmanship
OGHFA Presentation: Airmanship
OGHFA presentation: Situational Awareness
Elements of Airmanship - OGHFA Checklist

Further Reading

"What is Airmanship" - Flight Safety Australia, May-June 2005
Airmanship Training for Modern Aircrew - NATO/BAE SYSTEMS, 2003.
New Zealand Civil Aviation Authority (CAA) Publications, Vector Safety Magazine: Airmanship — Measuring Up.

References

^ Redefining Airmanship. Tony Kern. 1996.





Categories


General












Feedback