SE012 DIP - CFIT Prevention Training











  SE012 DIP - CFIT Prevention Training









Article Information

Category:



CAST Safety Enhancements 








Content source:




 CAST





 









Content control:




 CAST





 















SE-12 09/24/99
Implementation Plan For Training - CFIT Prevention
Statement of Work
Controlled Flight Into Terrain (CFIT) - accidents are the leading cause of commercial aviation equipment loss and fatalities, worldwide. CFIT accidents could be substantially reduced if all air carriers operating under Part 121 and Part 142 training centers developed CFIT prevention training and procedures to be added to their approved training curriculums stressing position awareness and escape maneuvers in the event of a terrain warning indication.
Lead Organization for Overall Coordination
AVR-1
Outcomes
Substantially reduce the CFIT accident rate by the addition of CFIT prevention training and procedures to all Part 121 air carriers approved training curriculums, emphasizing pilot situational awareness and escape procedures for flight crews to use in the event of a terrain warning indication.
Outputs

Conduct a review of all Part 121 air carriers by their assigned Principal Operations Inspectors (POI’s) to ascertain which air carriers do not have substantive CFIT prevention training and procedures in their approved Part 121 training programs.

Resources: FAA (AFS-1, AFS-200, POI’s) and ATA.
Timeline: 60 days.
Actions: Through Regional Flight Standards Division Managers, AFS-1 will request POI’s to conduct a review of their assigned Part 121 air carriers and identify those carriers that do not provide CFIT prevention training and procedures within their approved Part 121 training programs.

A Handbook Bulletin strongly recommending substantive CFIT prevention training and procedures in all Part 121 air carrier approved training programs with guidance to POI’s for minimum training program contents.

Resources: FAA (AFS-1, AFS-200, POI’s) and ATA.
Timeline: 180 days
Actions: Handbook Bulletin issued by AFS-200, training programs revised by air carriers and approval by the assigned POI.

Issue a copy of the CFIT Education and Training Aid to each POI whose air carrier does not incorporate CFIT prevention training and procedures in their approved Part 121 training program.

Resources: FAA (AFS-1, AFS-200, AFS-500, POI’s).
Timeline: 120 days.
Actions: POI’s will present the copy of the CFIT Education and Training Aid to their assigned air carrier requesting a revision to the carriers approved training program incorporating CFIT prevention training and procedures.

CFIT Education and Training Aid posted on the Worldwide Web (www).

Resources: FAA (AFS).
Timeline: Completed.
Actions: AFS-20 posted the CFIT Education and Training Aid on the “Web” in April of 1999.

All Part 121 Air Carriers and Part 142 Training Centers will incorporate the CFIT Education and Training Aid or similar training to their approved training programs.

Resources: FAA (POI’s), Air Carriers and Training Centers
Timeline: 120 days after receiving the training aid.
Action: All Part 121 Air Carriers and Part 142 training centers submit revised training programs incorporating CFIT prevention training and procedures.
Relationship to Current Aviation Community Initiatives:

CFIT Education and Training Aid previously distributed on two prior occasions, most recently by FAA/Flight Safety Foundation in September of 1997.
CFIT Education and Training Aid was posted on the “Web” in April 1999.


ATA member air carriers currently implementing a voluntary program to incorporate CFIT training into they’re members approved training programs.


When signed (expected first quarter of 2000), the TAWS rule will require CFIT training for all Part 121 air carriers. Newly manufactured aircraft will have one year after signing of the rule to comply; existing aircraft will have four years.


The international aviation community has similar training programs underway; ICAO and JAA are represented on the CFIT JSIT.

Performance Goals & Indicators for Outcomes/Outputs:

Goal: A substantial reduction of CFIT accidents involving Part 121 air carriers worldwide


Indicator: Part 121, air carrier CFIT accident rate, worldwide, drops to zero.


Goal: CFIT training aid provided to all Part 121 air carriers and Part 142 training centers not conducting CFIT training. The Training aid should be revised incorporating new technologies and making it more user friendly.


Indicator: A review of training programs indicates all Part 121 air carriers and Part 142 training centers conducting CFIT training.


Goal: Handbook Bulletin issued.


Indicator: Necessary training programs are revised and approved, all Part 121 air carriers and Part 142 training centers conducting CFIT training.


Goal: Post the CFIT Education and Training Aid on the “Web”.


Indicator: CFIT training aid posted on the “Web” in April of 1999.

Programmatic Approach
Organizational Strategy
The CFIT JSIT identified, Jerry Tegen, ACE-203, (816-426-5003) as the JSIT project lead for CFIT Prevention Training. The project lead will continue to work with AFS-1, AFS-200, AFS-500, and ATA until the Handbook Bulletin is issued. Thereafter, the project lead will coordinate implementation activities outlined in the implementation plan and will provide progress reports to the CFIT JSIT. Implementation is viewed as a shared responsibility between the FAA and the Part 121 air carriers. The FAA offices of primary responsibility (OPR) for this plan are AFS-1, AFS-200, AFS-500, and the POI’s respectively. The primary responsibility for industry is shared between ATA and the Part 121 air carriers.
Implementation Activities
A review of their assigned Part 121 air carriers will identify to the Principal Operations Inspectors those air carriers that do not presently provide CFIT training to their flight crews. A Handbook Bulletin will be prepared by AFS-200, in collaboration with industry partners specifying guidance to the POI’s and minimum training expectations. The CFIT Educational and Training Aid should be used as a minimum module content. The training aid needs to be revised to incorporate new technologies and to make it more user friendly. When revision of the training aid has been complete it should be distributed to all Part 121 air carriers so revisions to existing training modules, if needed, can be made. The training aid in its present form has been posted on the World Wide Webb.
Key Products and Milestones



CFIT Education and Training Aid developed.
September, 1997


CFIT Education and Training Aid distributed.
November, 1997


CFIT Education and Training Aid revision.
June, 1999


Handbook Bulletin requiring CFIT training drafted.
October, 1999


Handbook Bulletin requiring CFIT training issued.
December, 1999


Survey of Part 121 air carriers and Part 142 training centers by POI’s.
February, 2000


Redistribution of training aid to specific Part 121 air carriers and Part 142 training centers.
May, 2000


Training program revision by air carriers.
July, 2000


Approval of revised training programs by POI’s.
August, 2000


All Part 121 air carriers and Part 142 training centers conducting CFIT training.
September, 2000



Plan and Execution Requirements
The Training Aid should be updated and made more user friendly. ATA and other industry partners should continue to encourage all air carriers to voluntarily conduct CFIT prevention training. The review and Handbook Bulletin will ensure the training aid is directed at specific air carriers, those not presently providing CFIT prevention training to their flight crews. Short of rule making, this plan is the most expeditious method to include CFIT prevention training in all Part 121 air carrier and Part 142 training center training programs.
Risk Description

The training aid is not user friendly and needs updating.
Challenging of Handbook Bulletin and POI by the air carriers and Part 142 training centers.
CFIT training requirement by all Part 121 air carriers and Part 142 training centers may require a rule.

Will significantly delay CFIT training by all Part 121 air carriers.



Risk Mitigation Plan
Pending successful completion of Handbook guidance that would require CFIT prevention training and TAWS rule making, the FAA and ATA continue to encourage voluntary CFIT prevention training by all Part 121 air carriers and Part 142 training centers.
Impact on Non Part 121 or International Applications
The TAWS rule in itself will require CFIT training for all turbine engine equipped aircraft within four years after signature of the rule. Coordination with international organizations such as ICAO and JAA continues. Those organizations have their own agendas addressing CFIT accident reduction, both organizations are represented on the CFIT JSIT. Impact and risks identified by the CFIT JSIT are conveyed to other organizations as appropriate, such as the General Aviation CFIT JSAT and the Approach and Landing JSAT.
Related Safety Enhancements

SE012: CFIT Prevention Training

Related Outputs
None




Categories


CAST Safety Enhancements,
              CAST DIPs












Feedback