Hindsight 27











  Hindsight 27









Article Information

Category:



General 








Content source:




 EUROCONTROL





 









Content control:




 SKYbrary





 
















Download the full HindSight 27 magazine here
Published in August 2018, HindSight 27 focused on the theme of Competence and Expertise.
This edition also includes a supplement of additional articles only available on-line. Download the On-line Supplement to HindSight 27 here
Welcome
"Welcome to Issue 27 of HindSight magazine. The theme of this issue is ‘Competency and Expertise’. It is a topic that links to all previous Issues of HindSight.
Our ability to work effectively depends on the competency and expertise front-line practitioners and all involved in the operational, technical, support, and management functions. Safety isn’t something that is just ‘there’ in the aviation system. People actively create safety. But how do we create safety? And what do we need to do to help ensure that we can continue to do so? Competency and expertise is an important part of the answer.
In this issue, we have articles from operational, safety, human factors and psychology specialists. This is part of what makes HindSight unique – it brings together those who do the operational work, those who support operational work in a variety of ways, and those who study operational work to help better understand it. We are proud to give a voice to some of the world’s leading academic thinkers, and to operational and support specialists who have stories, experience and practical insights to convey. The key is that the articles are interesting and useful to the primary readers of HindSight: air traffic controllers and professional pilots, and hopefully to others who support operational work. Do we succeed? Let us know! In this Issue we explore the nature of competency and fundamental applications and implications for operational training, selection, and procedures, including non-technical skills and contingency. We then zoom out to regulatory and future issues. The regular feature on ‘Views from Elsewhere’ continues with articles from surgery and rail. These articles raise questions for us in aviation, and provide some practical ideas. And in this issue we have articles drawing from the world of sport. HindSight continues online over at SKYbrary with further articles in the online supplement, from aviation and other industries, on the theme of competency and expertise.
We also have ‘What we do’ good practice snippets. We’d particularly like to hear from more readers for this section. And this brings me to the next Issue, which will feature articles on ‘Change’. All readers have been affected by changes, in procedures, regulations, technology, people, incentives, organisation, etc. The pace of change will only increase. How do we change to adapt to the dynamic world of air traffic management? And how do we as individuals, teams, and organisations adapt to these changes? Let us know, in a few words or more, for your magazine on the safety or air traffic management – HindSight."
HindSight 27 Articles
Foreword

DG's Foreword, by Eamonn Brennan, Director General of EUROCONTROL.

Editorial

Vive la competence, by Steven Shorrock.

Op-ed

The dark side, by Rhona Flin.

Fundamental Issues

The good, the bad and the ugly, by Ashley Lauryssen.
Competence: Lagging or leading, by Erik Hollnagel.
Competency based training: Visible and invisible competencies, by Katrien Peeters.

Non-technical Skills

Developing non-technical skills, by Florence-Marie Jegoux.
The tyre, by Svetlana Bunjevac.
Questioning for competency assessment, by Emmanuelle Gravillon, Caroline Fauquembergue, Julie Baltet and Sylvain Dumousset.
Team resource management: Implementation survey 2017, by Anthony Seychell and Svetlana Bunjevac.
ATC simulation: a controller-led approach, by Juan Antonio Lombo Moruno.
INTERLAB: Supporting non-technical skills training, by Fabrice Drogoul.
Helping trainee controllers achieve their dreams, by Neil May.
Competency and moral dilemmas: “What would you do?”, by Steven Shorrock, Anna Wennerberg, and Tony Licu.

Contingency

Preparing for the unexpected, by Anders Ellerstrand.
Expertise and competency for contingency, by Önder Toydemir and Arife Aycan Mutlu.

View from the Air

Supporting pilot competence, by Ed Pooley.

Regulatory Issues

Regulatory and oversight competency: The ladder of abstraction, by Stefano Oberti.

Future Issues

The evolution of competency: From individual expertise to group competency, by Ludovic Mieusset and Sébastien Follet.
Competency and expertise for the future of ATM, by Linda Napoletano.

Views from elsewhere

Competence in surgery: From me to us, by Craig McIlhenny.
Achieving expertise through marginal gains: a rail perspective, by Paul Leach and Phillipa Murphy.

What we do

Good practice vignettes, by a variety of contributors from the air traffic controller community"

Interview

Expertise in elite professional golfers: An interview with Lee Crombleholme, by Steven Shorrock and Lee Crombleholme.

HindSight 27 On-line Supplement

Competency and Expertise in the nuclear industry, by Jon Berman.
Competency in power generation and distribution: four kinds of knowledge, by Rob Miles.
Regulating the competence of ATM staff, by Gauthier Sturtzer and Eamonn Wylie.
Talking about pilot and controller training and competencies, by Florence-Marie Jegoux and Jerome Schimpff.
Human Factors and Resource Management training: Views from land, air and sea, by various authors from different industries.

Register to Receive Your Copy of HindSight Magazine
Register here for a copy of HindSight magazine to be sent to you by post or email every time a new edition is published
See all editions of HindSight magazine




Categories


General












Feedback