ES2 2015











  ES2 2015









Article Information

Category:



General 








Content source:




 SKYbrary





 









Content control:




 SKYbrary





 















During 2015, three ES2 meetings took place. The Locations of the working sessions ranged from Cyprus, Croatia to Spain. Two normal working sessions and a CEO Safety Conference regarding Strategic Safety have been established along the year.
Go back to all editions of ES2 Meetings
WS 01-14
The first working session's theme was "SAF-TOOLS (iSMS)" and was held at Nicosia, between 21-22nd of May. The workshop was dedicated to “Safety tools to support Safety Management Systems – implementation at regional level”. It focused on the ways that SMS harmonization can be achieved through the integration and implementation of common Safety Tools processes against the regulatory and system changes so that it can be considered how its implementation be best prepared.
The presentations from this workshop can be found below:

ES2 WS01-15 Agenda
Safety Tools Complementarity in the Context of FAB
Safety Performance Monitoring Tool in FAB Context
ASMT Operational Experience in LPS FAB CE
ASMT V5
ASMT Considerations for FAB Implementation
Aerospace Performance Factor
eTOKAI on Web Platforms
Mandatory Occurence Reporting System in Italy
FAA Safety Tools
ES2 Feedback 2012-2015

 
WS 02-15
This second meeting was the CEO Safety Conference, that happened at Split, Croatia, between 10-11 th of June and it was focused on the Strategic Safety. The objectives of this meeting were to make aware the participants of the new Reference Period that has just been implemented since January 2015 and to find methods to reduce costs, improve efficiency and provide more capacity while preserving safety.
 
The materials and the presentations from the conference are listed below:

CEO Conference Agenda
Network Manager View on Dealing with Operational Safety from Systems'Perspective
Going Solid and Flirting with the Margin Richard Cook
The Dynamics of Safety
The next generation of SMS DSNA
DFS'SMS 2.0

WS 03-15
This year ended with the working session whose theme was "System Safety Thinking", oriented towards understanding the normal work. It was organised at Barcelona, between 5-7th of October.
The presentations from this working session are attached:

Challenges in Safety Management: DFS's View
Do Brokers and ATCOs/Pilots Have Something in Common When Making Decisions?
Best Practices from Barcelona ACC APROCTA
Perceiving What Cannot be Seen: Safety II in a RWY Incursion Prevention Programme
The Practical Side of Safety II Erik Hollnagel
How Complexity Overwhelms Rules Building David Woods
Operational Risk & SMS Synergy RYANAIR
An Airline's Perspective easyJet
Studying Ordinary Work Richard Cook
Lesons from Web Operations etsy
Automation in ATM System Design DFS
Practicalities of Advanced Controller Assistance Tools
Are we Ready for Safety II? APROCTA
Automation in the Cockpit: Human-Machine Interaction Don Harris


Go back to all editions of ES2 Meetings




Categories


General












Feedback