Peer Assessment











  Peer Assessment









Article Information

Category:



Human Factors Methods













Description
Peer Assessment involves the observation, by an experienced operator, of the operator carrying out the exercise.
Discussion/References
Peer Assessment techniques are essentially a craft skill, and are rarely discussed in the published literature.

EEC Report # 164 (David and Noonan, 1983) discusses the pitfalls of peer assessment. In particular, ATC working methods, which reflect operators’ experience of widely varied sectors, are extremely variable. This presents a danger that the peer assessor will either grade the operator in terms of how difficult he thinks he would himself find the traffic, or of the extent to which the operator uses the same techniques as he does.
Dubey (1998) in a social anthropologist’s study of real-time simulation discusses the emotional links that develop in operator and pilot teams. These may well affect peer assessments.
ANON, RE ASSESSMENT OF THE CAPACITY OF THE CONTROL SECTORS OF MAASTRICHT UAC., Feb 1984, pp 6 + 21 tables. presents an example of peer assessment for capacity assessment.
Oppenheim A.N., Questionnaire Design, Interviewing and Attitude Measurement, 1992 (1st ed. 1996), Cassel: London (ISBN 1 85567 044 5) gives a general (non-ATC specific) introduction to this type of measurement.





Categories


Human Factors Methods












Generics


Type of method
Subjective


Target of method
Strain, Stress


Peer Assessments are generally used to assess workload, but in terms of how it affects the operator. It is therefore inclined to be ambiguous about what it actually measures.


Time Scale of method
Hours


Peer Assessments usually require at least an hour of continuous assessment, although the assessor may record his opinion at five minute intervals, it usually requires a complete simulation to provide a definite assessment.


Portability of method
Yes


In principle, Peer Assessments, since they need no equipment, can be held wherever and whenever convenient - during a working shift in an operational centre, for example.


Observer Effect
Yes


The operator will be aware that his actions are being assessed by another operator, and may modify his behaviour, either by being over-precise, or by trying to appear relaxed and ‘on top of the job’.


Context of studies


Laboratory studies
Use


 


Simulation studies
Avoid


 


Field studies
Caution


 


Potential problems with the method


Failure risk
Moderate


Some assessors find that they cannot make assessments, particularly where a novel system is being introduced.


Bias risk
High


The assessor, unless carefully briefed, may either start to assess the traffic rather than the operator, or may mentally impose his own ‘style’ of control as a standard.


Ethical problems
Privacy


Operators carrying out assessments must not discuss their observations of specific operators in public.


Costs of the method


Staff Cost
High


Peer Assessments must always be carried out by skilled experienced operators, capable of understanding the operators’ actions and judging their relevance and effectiveness. One assessor is needed per operator measured.


Set-up Cost
High


Considerable effort must be invested in training and standardising the assessors.


Running Cost
High


The cost of the staff required is high.


Analysis Cost
Low


Peer Assessments are summarised by the assessor at the end of each exercise. Formal analysis is neither required nor needed.


Analysis data


Analysis Speed
Fast


Conclusions are available immediately.


Data Automation
No


Not needed. Assessments could be input and handled in questionnaire form if required.


Analysis Automation
No


 


Status
Established


Routinely used (in National ATC Centres).















Feedback