ICAO Annexes and Doc Series











  ICAO Annexes and Doc Series









Article Information

Category:



Rules 








Content source:




 SKYbrary





 









Content control:




 EUROCONTROL





 















Introduction
ICAO SARPS (Standards and Recommended Practices) for each area of ICAO responsibility are contained in 19 Annexes. Each Annex deals with a particular subject area. All are subject to regular amendment and the detail in respect of many of them is contained in publications in the numbered ICAO Document Series.
The ICAO Annexes
The Annexes are:

Annex 1 - Personnel Licensing
Annex 2 - Rules of the Air
Annex 3 - Meteorological Services
Annex 4 - Aeronautical Charts
Annex 5 - Units of Measurement
Annex 6 - Operation of Aircraft
Annex 7 - Aircraft Nationality and Registration Marks
Annex 8 - Airworthiness of Aircraft
Annex 9 - Facilitation
Annex 10 - Aeronautical Telecommunications
Annex 11 - Air Traffic Services
Annex 12 - Search and Rescue
Annex 13 - Aircraft Accident and Incident Investigation
Annex 14 - Aerodromes
Annex 15 - Aeronautical Information Services
Annex 16 - Environmental Protection
Annex 17 - Security
Annex 18 - The Safe Transportation of Dangerous Goods by Air
Annex 19 - Safety Management

Annexes 2, 5, 7 & 8 contain international standards and no recommended practices (RPs). The remaining 15 Annexes contain both.
Contracting States are required to give notification of differences to standards, and invited to notify differences from Recommended Practices in Annexes. This information is then listed in Supplements to the Annexes.
It should be noted that ICAO Standards do not preclude the development of national standards which may be more stringent than those contained in an Annex.
For short descriptions of Annexes 1 through 18, click here.
The Doc Series
The ICAO Documents cover a range of matters from regulation to guidance. Some are free of charge while others are only obtainable at a fee.
To access the Documents, visit ICAO’s website. Some of ICAO's publications are free to access.
Related Articles

Chicago Convention
International Civil Aviation Organisation (ICAO)
Standards and Recommended Practices (SARPS)





Categories


Rules












Feedback