SE215: Runway Excursion - Landing Distance Assessment











  SE215: Runway Excursion - Landing Distance Assessment









Article Information

Category:



CAST Safety Enhancements 








Content source:




 CAST





 









Content control:




 CAST





 















Status: COMPLETED
Background
The purpose of this Safety Enhancement is to improve flight crew awareness of their landing distance margin and the factors and variables that can affect it. Flight crews should assess landing performance based on conditions actually existing at time of arrival (rather than the conditions presumed at dispatch), including weather, runway conditions (using standardized terminology), aircraft weight, braking systems, and performance assumptions. To support this assessment, the following should be accomplished:

Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) Flight Standards Service (AFX) develops guidance material incorporating Takeoff and Landing Performance Assessment (TALPA) Aviation Rulemaking Committee (ARC) recommendations addressing procedures for conducting a landing performance assessment using actual conditions existing at the time of arrival (including standardizing terms used to report conditions and make landing distance assessments).
FAA Office of Airports (ARP) develops guidance material to define terms and format for reporting runway conditions and criteria for clearing or closing runways when friction levels degrade to a level where safe operations are not assured.
FAA Aircraft Certification Service (AIR) develops guidance material for how manufacturers should provide airplane landing distance data consistent with TALPA recommendations, including for contaminated surfaces.
FAA Air Traffic Organization (ATO) revises their procedures to allow controllers to report timely runway conditions to pilots using TALPA terminology.
Airport operators incorporate the guidance material into their runway assessment procedures and report the runway conditions using the new terminology.
Manufacturers provide a standardized set of landing distance performance data, which will support the new landing distance calculation standard as defined by guidance material.
Air Carriers incorporate the guidance material and manufacturers’ landing standardized assessment data into standard operating procedures (SOP) and training to implement landing assessment at time of arrival.

Related Implementation Plan
Detailed Implementation Plan
Related Outputs
The Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) has issued Advisory Circular AC 91-79A, Mitigating the Risks of a Runway Overrun Upon Landing, Safety Alert for Operators (SAFO) 16009, Runway Assessment and Condition Reporting, Notice N8900.374, Revised FAA-Approved Deicing Program Updates, Winter 2016-2017, and Notice N8900.375, Procedures for Reducing the Risk of Runway Overrun (TALPA). The Notices apply to the year 2016-2017; revised ones are issued each year. This completes Output 1 of the Safety Enhancement.
The FAA has issued Advisory Circular AC 150/5200-30D, Airport Field Condition Assessments and Winter Operations Safety. This completes Output 2 of the Safety Enhancement.
The FAA has issued Advisory Circulars AC 25-31, Takeoff Performance Data for Operations on Contaminated Runways and AC 25-32, Landing Performance Data for Time-of-Arrival Landing Performance Assessments. This completes Output 3 of the Safety Enhancement.
The FAA has issued Notices JO 7110.720, JO 7110.721 and JO 7210.898 for Takeoff and Landing Performance Assessment (TALPA). The Notices apply to the year 2016-2017; revised ones are issued each year. This completes Output 4 of the Safety Enhancement.
Airplane manufacturers are providing Takeoff and Landing Performance Assessment (TALPA) data for the recent fleets. This completes Output 6 of the Safety Enhancement.
Related SKYbrary Articles

Runway Excursion
Runway Surface Friction
Runway friction characteristics measurement and aircraft braking
Aviation Rulemaking Committee evaluation of Take-off and Landing Performance Assessment requirements





Categories


CAST Safety Enhancements,
              CAST Safety Enhancements Plan












Feedback