Hindsight 29











  Hindsight 29









Article Information

Category:



General 








Content source:




 EUROCONTROL





 









Content control:




 SKYbrary





 
















Download the full HindSight 29 magazine here
Published in October 2019, HindSight 29 focused on the theme of Goal conflicts and trade-offs.
This edition also includes a supplement only available on-line. Download the On-line Supplement to HindSight 29 here
Welcome
"Welcome to Issue 29 of HindSight magazine – the EUROCONTROL magazine on the safety of air traffic management. The theme of this Issue is ‘Goal Conflicts and Trade-offs’. For this magazine, and you the readers, safety is a particularly important goal. But it exists along with several other goals, including the environment, capacity, cost-efficiency, and security. The importance of each goal, and how we work to achieve them, changes depending on the situation, in the short and long term. In this Issue, we have a fantastic range of articles from air traffic controllers, professional pilots, human factors and safety management specialists, as well as specialists from other industries to give some outside perspectives. HindSight is written primarily for air traffic controllers and professional pilots, and others with a professional interest in the themes, especially those who support safety and front-line work. For operational and non-operational staff alike, it is important to hear from others, in other places, and roles: controllers, pilots, safety management specialists, designers, engineers, and managers at all levels, in all parts of aviation. It is important to understand the reality of front-line work and how the aviation system – and society more generally – affects this reality. With HindSight, we hope to help create conversations about the themes and issues. Do your operational and non-operational colleagues know about HindSight? Would you be willing to ask them, and encourage them to subscribe? Search ‘SKYbrary HindSight’ for details, and if you need paper copies for your Ops room, then please get in touch. This Issue – as usual – blends articles on the reality of work. The articles are written by air traffic controllers and professional pilots, and those who study or make decisions about work and safety. We have more articles from pilots than usual, and we know that this will be appreciated. The authors address a number of questions about goal conflicts and trade-offs, such as: What goals influence human and system behaviour? How do they affect us and the aviation system more generally? What trade-offs do we need to make to resolve the dilemmas that we face? How does safety fit into the picture? How can we talk about these issues openly? HindSight writers contribute freely. It is how they give back to the aviation community and travelling public, and keep up their professional development. This is something mentioned in this Issue by Captain Richard Champion de Crespigny – captain of QF32. In fact, professional development was a critical influence on the outcome that day. The next Issue of HindSight is on ‘Wellbeing’. This is a topic that can be more difficult to discuss than ‘hard’ safety topics, but it is one that has real consequences for individuals, families, organisations, and the public. What are your experiences when it comes to wellbeing and safety? Let us know, in a few words or more, for Issue 30 of HindSight magazine."
HindSight 29 Articles
Foreword

Foreword, by Iacopo Prissinotti, Director of Network Management Directorate, EUROCONTROL.
Invited Foreword, by Alex Bristol, CEO of skyguide.

Editorial

The reality of goal conflicts and trade-offs, by Steven Shorrock.

Op-ed

Trade-offs and taboos, by Jean Paries.

From Theory to Practice

Invisible trade-offs and visible consequences, by Erik Hollnagel.

The long read

QF32: how it went right, an interview with Captain Richard Champion de Crespigny.
Decision-making at work: QF32 and you, Steven Shorrock reflects on a conversation with Captain Richard Champion de Crespigny.

Views from the Ground

Making sense of goal conflicts and tradeoffs in air traffic management, by Stathis Malakis.
I am not a machine, by Julie Baltet.
Do they care about safety?, by Florence-Marie Jegoux.
Good job, everybody, by Emmanuelle Gravalon.
Fifty shades of trade-offs: from ATC to anaesthesia, by Ludovic Mieusset, Francois Jaulin, and Sebastien Follet.
Safety support for operational efficiency, by Maria Kovacova.
Surveillance data processing trade-offs, by Ceca Bunjevac.
To regulate, or not to regulate?, by Anders Ellerstrand.
Changing the language of safety, by Tom Lintner.
Safety management Q&A, by Francis Bezzina.

Views from the Air

To go, or not to go?, by Captain Paul Reuter.
Safety first! Or not? , by Captain Wolfgang Starke.
Under pressure: the self-induced stress of a HEMS pilot, by Captain Owen McTeggart.
Managing goal conflicts in flight operations, by Captain Brian Legge.
Goal conflicts and trade-offs before take off, by Captain Guy Malpas.

Views from elsewhere

Conflicts within and without: learning from Costa Concordia, by Nippin Anand.
Dilemmas in healthcare, by Suzette Woodward.

HindSight 29 On-line Supplement

The Trade-offs of Noise, by John Stewart.

Register to Receive Your Copy of HindSight Magazine
Register here for a copy of HindSight magazine to be sent to you by post or email every time a new edition is published
See all editions of HindSight magazine




Categories


General












Feedback