Airport Climatology/Northern Europe











  Airport Climatology/Northern Europe









Article Information

Category:



Weather 








Content source:




 SKYbrary





 









Content control:




 EUROCONTROL





 















The Climate of Northern Europe
The climate of Europe is of a temperate, continental nature, with a maritime climate prevailing on the western coasts (Köppen climate classification Cfb), and a mediterranean climate in the south (Köppen climate classification Csa), while eastern Europe is continental and dry (Köppen climate classification Dfb).
The climate is strongly conditioned by the Gulf Stream, which warms the western region to levels unattainable at similar latitudes on other continents. Four seasons occur in western Europe, while southern Europe experiences a wet season and a dry season. Southern Europe is hot and dry during the summer months. Prevailing westerlies (conditioned by the Azores High), bring rain from the Atlantic ocean to the west, while the Siberian High brings colder, drier weather from the east. Eastern Europe experiences a two-season, hot and cold cycle.
Tornadoes occur within Europe, but tend to be weak. The Netherlands and United Kingdom experience a disproportionately high number of tornadic events.
Airports
The following map shows the Köppen climate classification (KCC) for aerodromes across Northern Europe which are listed on SKYbrary:









Af
Am
Aw
As




BWh
BWk
BSh
BSk




Csa
Csb
Csc




Cwa
Cwb
Cwc




Cfa
Cfb
Cfc




Dsa
Dsb
Dsc
Dsd




Dwa
Dwb
Dwc
Dwd




Dfa
Dfb
Dfc
Dfd




ET
EF







Climatic and Weather Phenomena Affecting Aviation in Northern Europe

Fog - Northwest Europe is prone to Fog in the late Autumn/Fall and early Winter.
Low Temperatures - Pilots should remember to apply Altimeter Temperature Error Correction when the aerodrome temperature is 0°C or colder, especially when the aerodrome is in mountainous terrain e.g. northern Norwegian coast in winter.





Categories


Weather












Feedback