EUROCONTROL Safety Team Best Practice Safety Pamphlets











  EUROCONTROL Safety Team Best Practice Safety Pamphlets









Article Information

Category:



Safety Management 








Content source:




 EUROCONTROL





 









Content control:




 SKYbrary





 















Introduction
The EUROCONTROL Safety Team is a specialist advisory body established within the framework of EUROCONTROL which aims to drive safety improvement in the provision of Air Navigation Services in the ECAC States.
Consequently, the EUROCONTROL Safety Team:

Promotes, develops and supports effective European air traffic management (ATM) Safety Management;
Provides support for improvement of ATM operational safety.

Support to Enhance Effective Safety Management Systems (SMS)
In the context of providing support to air navigation service providers (ANSPs) to enhance the effectiveness of their SMSs, amongst a variety of programmes and initiatives, a series of Safety Team ‘Best’ practice pamphlets is being produced to share accumulated and hard won safety experience and knowledge.
The pamphlets rely wholly on the input of ANSPs who provide the raw materials that are developed with EUROCONTROL to produce ‘best’ practice advice to other ANSPs so that they can learn from the experience of others and enhance their own SMSs and operational safety.
Safety Team ‘Best’ Practice Pamphlets

FerroNATS – “Competency Monitoring Through R/T Sampling”.

This pamphlet provides advice on how to use radio telephony sampling to improve air traffic controllers’ communications skills.

ENAIRe – “COSEGO – High Level Safety Committee”.

This pamphlet provides advice on how a high level Management Board committee can maintain awareness of, and involvement in, an ANSP’s critical safety strengths and weaknesses.

Austrocontrol – “Just Culture - Assessing Safety Behaviours”.

This pamphlet provides advice on how to assess the safety behaviour of operational personnel involved in incidents in the context of also providing a Just Culture.
Related Articles

EUROCONTROL
Safety Management System
SMS Organisational Structure
Competency
Just Culture

Further Reading

Network Manager Safety website





Categories


Safety Management,
              SM Methods and Tools












Feedback