Approach and Landing Accidents (ALA)











  Approach and Landing Accidents (ALA)









Article Information

Category:



Controlled Flight Into Terrain 








Content source:




 SKYbrary





 









Content control:




 SKYbrary





 















Definitions

Approach: The phase of flight starting when an airworthy aircraft under the control of the flight crew descends below 5,000 feet AGL with the intention to conduct an approach and ending when the aircraft crosses the approach end of the landing runway (runway threshold) or at the commencement of a go around maneuver.
Landing: The phase of flight starting when an airworthy aircraft under the control of the flight crew crosses the approach end of the landing runway (runway threshold) and ending when the aircraft safely exits the landing runway, or at the commencement of a go around manoeuvre.
Approach and Landing phase of flight: The phase of flight starting when an airworthy aircraft under the control of the flight crew descends below 5,000 feet AGL with the intention to conduct an approach and ending when the aircraft safely exits the landing runway, or the flight crew conducts a go around and flys the aircraft above 5,000 feet AGL enroute to another airport.
Approach and Landing Accident: An accident that occurs during the approach and landing phase of flight.

Description
Approach and landing is the highest risk phase of flight, accounting for over 50 percent of all accidents at every level of aviation. Many types of accidents can happen during the approach and landing phase of flight. The most common types of approach and landing accidents are; CFIT (controlled flight into terrain), LOC (loss of control), and runway excursions.
Considerations
Because of its inherent risk there have been many international efforts addressing the approach and landing phase of flight. These efforts have primarily addressed the highest risk areas such as CFIT and runway excursions. They have addressed all aspects of approach and landing accidents, and in addition they also addressed all the responsible parties involved with reducing the risk of approach and landing accidents. These parties include the aircraft manufacturers, aircraft operators, aircrews, air traffic management, regulators, and airports. Many interventions have been created to assist in reducing the risk of accidents in the approach and landing phase of flight. One of these is stabilized approach criteria, which are designed to assist the crew in flying a safe approach and landing. Another intervention is safe landing criteria, which assist the crew in reducing the risk during the landing phase of flight.
Accidents and Incidents

SKYclip









 Read more




Shortcuts and unstable approaches (SKYclip)









Related Articles

Controlled Flight Into Terrain (CFIT)
Runway Excursion
Loss of Control

Further Reading
DGAC (France) has published three documents in the English language related to non-stabilised approaches.
Flight Safety Foundation Copies of the FSF ALAR Toolkit on CD may be obtained from the Flight Safety Foundation

ALAR Briefing Note 5.1 - Approach Hazard Awareness
ALAR Briefing Note 7.1 - Stabilized Approach
ALAR Briefing Note 8.1 - Runway Excursions and Overruns
Reducing the Risk of Runway Excursions - Report of the Runway Safety Initiative
Runway Excursion Risk Awareness Tool
Non-stabilized Approach After ATC-Requested Runway Change (OGHFA SE)
Runway Overrun On Landing (OGHFA SE)
CFIT Checklist (available in Arabic, Chinese, English, French, Russian and Spanish), external links
CFIT Education and Training Aid

Airbus Safety Library

Airbus Approach Techniques Briefing Note - Flying Stabilized Approaches
Airbus Approach Techniques Briefing Note - Aircraft Energy Management during Approach
Airbus Operational Environment Briefing Note - Enhancing Terrain Awareness
FOBN - Approach Hazard Awareness offers a more expanded and categorised review of approach hazards

CANSO

Runway Excursions - An ATC Perspective on Unstable Approaches
Avoiding Unstable Approaches - Important Tips for ATCOs
Unstable Approaches – ATC Considerations, January 2011





Categories


Controlled Flight Into Terrain,
              Loss of Control,
              Runway Excursion












Feedback