Embraer 135, 140, 145, Legacy - Inadvertent Change of Radio Frequencies or Placing Transponder into Standby Mode











  Embraer 135, 140, 145, Legacy - Inadvertent Change of Radio Frequencies or Placing Transponder into Standby Mode









Article Information

Category:



Safety Warning Message







Content source:




 EUROCONTROL





 









Content control:




 EUROCONTROL





 















Background Information from FAA

The United States Federal Aviation Administration reported an issue with radio and transponder operations on Embraer 135, 140, 145, and Legacy aircraft.
If a foot is placed by a crew member on the footrest just below the instrument panel, that could inadvertently put the ATC transponder into standby mode, or change radio frequencies without the crew's awareness.
Furthermore, pilots might not notice the corresponding indication on the Pilot Flight Display due to the white letters, which are not as noticeable as differently coloured caution or warning indications.

FAA Recommended Actions

Operators flying any of these Embraer models, as well as training centres, should immediately make this hazard known to their pilots and should make sure that it is addressed in their training programs, especially during flight training, supervised operating experience, and line checks.

EUROCONTROL Mode S & ACAS Programme Advice

The loss of transponder functionality will make the aircraft “invisible” to ATC and will render Airborne Collision Avoidance System (ACAS) inoperative.
The relevant displays/indicators should be routinely scanned during the flight to monitor continued operation of transponder and TCAS.

Reference

United States Federal Aviation Administration Safety Alert for Operator 07005.
EUROCONTROL Mode S & ACAS

Disclaimer
© European Organisation for Safety of Air Navigation (EUROCONTROL) November 2007. This alert is published by EUROCONTROL for information purposes. It may be copied in whole or in part, provided that EUROCONTROL is mentioned as the source and to the extent justified by the non-commercial use (not for sale). The information in this document may not be modified without prior written permission from EUROCONTROL. The use of the document is at the user’s sole risk and responsibility. EUROCONTROL expressly disclaim any and all warranties with respect to any content within the alert, express or implied.




Categories


Safety Warning Message












Feedback