The On-the-job Training Instructor (OJTI)











  The On-the-job Training Instructor (OJTI)









Article Information

Category:



ATM Operations Training BP







Content source:




 SKYbrary





 









Content control:




 SKYbrary





 















Definitions
On-the-job training instructor (OJTI) - a rated air traffic controller with an air traffic control licence endorsed with a current qualification that permits the holder to carry out instruction in the operational environment for which the rating is issued.
Source: European Manual of Personnel Licensing - Air Traffic Controllers
On-the-job training instruction - the phase of unit training during which previously acquired job-related routines and skills are integrated in practice under the supervision of a qualified on-the-job training instructor in a live traffic situation.
On-the-job training instructor (OJTI) endorsement - the authorisation entered on and forming part of a licence, indicating the competence of the holder to give on-the-job training instruction and instruction on synthetic training devices
Source: EU Regulation 2015/340
Description
On-the-job training is the part of training where the trainee provides air traffic service to real aircraft, while there is another person supervising the process and is responsible for safety. There are two key elements to the OJTI endorsement:

It is a separate endorsement which implies that the holder is capable of teaching the job to other people. This endorsement is not bound to any rating. For example, if a tower controller receives an OJTI endorsement and then obtains an approach controller rating, they will not need to undergo a second OJTI course because of the new rating (notwithstanding the necessity for a refresher OJTI course on a regular basis).
The endorsement is only applicable for the positions that the controller is allowed to work at. This means that e.g. if an OJTI has not practiced their privileges as a license holder for a particular position, they will lose both the option to work at that position and to train others. Also, if they lose their medical license, they will not be allowed to conduct any on-the-job training.

A person may become an OJTI after successfully completing an OJTI training course. There they learn various training techniques as well as how to deal with training documentation. In order to preserve competency, OJTI refresher courses must be periodically completed in addition to the refresher courses for air traffic controllers.
Air traffic controller training is competency-based, with emphasis on standards of performance and their measurement. This means that by the end of the process the trainee is supposed to perform a list of tasks at or above a specified threshold (standard). To facilitate this, the OJTI must:

instruct on the basis of the training plan and associated training materials (these contain the requirements for successful completion of the training process)
provide timely and continuous feedback on trainee performance (the trainee should finish each session with a clear understanding of what they need to do to progress)
use the competency model to diagnose the root cause(s) of performance difficulties (a poor decision on part of the trainee could be the result of a number of factors; if the OJTI focuses on the error itself, the underlying cause may remain unaddressed)
recognize the challenges associated with instructing and diagnosing deficiencies in the cognitive processes (the OJTI may observe the actions of the trainee but could rarely be certain about the processes that have led to those actions)
manage issues related to attitude (the ultimate goal of controller training is to produce people with appropriate attitude in addition to building knowledge and skills)

The OJT Phase
On-the-job training is a necessary part of ATCO training. While classroom and simulator training can help build up knowledge and develop basic controller skills, there are aspects of the job that cannot be reproduced easily (or at all), e.g.:

Real aircraft behaviour. Despite many years of improvement, certain aircraft performance features are difficult (at best) to represent in a simulator.
Different accents and language skills
The use of real radio equipment with associated variations of sound quality, frequency blocking, etc.
"Slight" deviations from applicable procedures. 
Unpredictability. Real life traffic is unpredictable. 
(relative) boredom. It is common for simulator exercises to contain a lot of situations, therefore the trainee quickly adapts to the scan-plan-resolve routine. However, in real life traffic, it is common to have periods of low traffic intensity or without any need for major controller intervention. A prolonged (e.g. a few hours) exposure to such environment may suppress the effectiveness of trainee scanning. Learning to remain vigilant in situations where everything seems to be going right is essential and can only be learned during the OJT phase.

Core Skills
The core skills of an OJTI fall into two main categories: job-related (i.e. provision of ATS) and personal (i.e. provision of training). They include:

Vigilance at all times. The presence of an extra person is an inherent source of [[distraction]]. It is often beneficial to discuss various job aspects while being at the controller working position (fusing theory and practice). However, this should not be done at the expense of safety and the OJTI must be able to recognize a developing situation.
Excellent working skills. The value of this skill is twofold. Firstly, demonstration is an important part of the OJT process. The instructor will be unable to simultaneously demonstrate and explain if they are just able to perform at the bare minimum level. Secondly, the OJTI is an important safety net in case of gross mistake on part of the trainee. They must be able to rectify the situation promptly and efficiently.
Persistence. The OJTI needs to keep their knowledge (of procedures, equipment, etc.) current at all times. This requires them to oppose the natural human tendency to resist change.
Tutoring skills, including:

Ability to transfer knowledge and skill. This includes explaining job aspects in a way that the trainee can understand, ability to convey a message in a number of different ways (to account for differences between trainees).
Patience. Training is usually a difficult and long process. Few trainees are able to take account of all aspects of the situation and everything they have been taught. Therefore, sometimes multiple repetitions are necessary. The OJTI must acknowledge this and not jump to conclusions too early.
Balance, e.g. providing opportunity for the trainee to learn from their mistakes while at the same time constantly being on the watch for a possible safety breach
Discretion, e.g. the ability to distinguish between a situation where the trainee is making an error but is likely to overcome that versus continuous lack of progress making completion of training unlikely



Similar Positions
There are two main types of practical skill instructors - the OJTI and the simulator instructor (known as STDI, synthetic training device instructor, in the European Union). There are many similarities between the two:

both focus on teaching practical skills (which are similar to a great extent regardless of the training phase)
both need to be good at the job (so that they can demonstrate it)
both need to be able and patient teachers

At the same time, there is a substantial differences between the two. The OJTI is responsible for the safety of air traffic in the sector/unit. They are expected to quickly take over if an unsafe situation develops. Therefore, they need a valid license for the respective controller working position. By contrast, a simulator instructor may provide training at a simulator if they have had former experience as a controller but for some reasons (e.g. medical) this is no longer the case. This is why sometimes OJTIs are assigned to do the job in a simulator (especially in the unit training phase) while a specialized simulator instructor is not allowed to provide training at a live working position.
The OJTI also shares some skills with the competency assessor, who is a person tasked with evaluating whether the trainee has achieved the required level of performance (and ultimately, whether they are ready to work without supervision). The required knowledge and skills of the two often overlap. The assessor needs to be well aware of the training procedures so they know what performance should be expected at each phase of the training. The OJTI needs to be knowledgeable of the assessment procedures as they have to evaluate the trainee performence during each session. Sometimes a person can perform both roles, provided all relevant requirements for each of them are met (and there are no conflict of interest issues).
Related Articles

Controller Training
Controller Refresher Training
How Air Traffic Control Works
Minimum Hours in Position

Further Reading

EU Regulation 2015/340 - ATCO Licensing
ICAO Doc 9868 PANS-TRG
ICAO Doc 10056 Manual on Air Traffic Controller Competency-based Training and Assessment
European Manual of Personnel Licensing - Air Traffic Controllers





Categories


ATM Operations Training BP












Feedback