Hindsight 26











  Hindsight 26









Article Information

Category:



General 








Content source:




 EUROCONTROL





 









Content control:




 SKYbrary





 
















Published in December 2017, HindSight 26 focused on the theme of Safety at the Interfaces - Collaboration at Work.
HindSight 26 Articles
Editorial

Bonding and bridging: expanding who "we" are, by Steven Shorrock.

Op-ed

The voice of an angel, by Professor Sidney Dekker.

From the briefing room

Collaborative adaptation in a constrained system: getting the balance right, by Don Gyles and Chris Bearman.
From experience reports to experience sharing, by Florence-Marie Jegoux, Ludovic Mieusset, Sébastien Follet and Erick Hoarau.
Using aircraft as sensors to measure runway condition, by Daniel Percy, Logan Jones, and Fabien Moll.
Collaboration over the North Atlantic: the role of the radio operator and joint operations, by Gudmundur Sigurdsson.
Communication and technology at the interface, by Marc Baumgartner.
Human-machine collaboration: fight or fly?, by Giusy Sciacca.
Dr Jackal and Mr Giraffe, by Maciej Szczukowski.
But we're still friends?, by Paavo Puranen.
Interfacing notes for the incident investigator, by Sebastian Daeunert.
The Brussels airport local runway safety team: collaboration at work, by Davy van Hyfte.
Do you trust your safety manager?, by Maria Kovacova.
My very safe near miss, by Istvan Hegedus.
Safety is real only when shared: understanding controllers' and managers' perceptions, by Florence-Marie Jegoux.
The Luton safety stack, by Barry Kirwan, Sian Blanchard, and Sarah Flaherty.
Have you listened to your neighbours lately?, by Joao Esteves and Antonio Guerrero Compas.
How fierce competitors joined forces to make offshore helicopter operations safer, by Gretchen Haskins.
How does collaboration in SESAR enable safety enhancement?, by Conor Mullan.
EUROCONTROL: connecting people for safety, by Tony Licu

Views from elsewhere

Building "healthy" teams: multi professional team training for the operating theatre environment, by Bryn Baxendale.
Collaboration in post-incident review, by John Allspaw.

In conversation

Learning from communities: a conversation with Cormac Russell, by Steven Shorrock.

What we do

Ideas and practices from the front-line, by a variety of contributors from the air traffic controller and pilot community"

Register to Receive Your Copy of HindSight Magazine
Register here for a hardcopy of HindSight magazine to be sent to you by post every time a new edition is published
See all editions of HindSight magazine




Categories


General












Feedback