Damage Aircraft Taxonomy











  Damage Aircraft Taxonomy









Article Information

Category:



ICAO ADREP 








Content source:




 ICAO





 









Content control:




 ICAO





 















Definition
The ADREP damage aircraft taxonomy is a set of terms used by ICAO to categorize an occurrence by the highest level of of damage sustained by any aircraft involved in that occurrence and to allow safety trend analysis on these categories. The ADREP damage aircraft taxonomy is part of the ICAO accident data reporting system (ADREP).
Terms
Destroyed
The damage sustained makes it inadvisable to restore the aircraft to an airworthy condition. This differs from the definition of a hull loss which reads: The aircraft is damaged beyond economical repair. A determination of "hull loss" is thus not only the result of a technical evaluation but may result from economic considerations.
Substantial
The aircraft sustained damage or structural failure which: - adversely affected the structural strength, performance or flight characteristics of the aircraft and - would normally require major repair or replacement of the affected component, except for engine failure or damage, when the damage is limited to the engine, its cowlings or accessories; or for damage limited to propellers, wing tips, antennas, tyres, brakes, fairings, small dents or puncture holes in the aircraft skin. In this context, a major repair is a repair

That, if improperly done, might appreciably affect weight, balance, structural strength, performance, powerplant operation, flight characteristics, or other qualities affecting airworthiness; or
That is not done according to accepted practices or cannot be done by elementary operations.

Minor
The aircraft can be rendered airworthy by simple repairs or replacement and an extensive inspection is not necessary.
None
The aircraft sustained no damage.
Unknown
The damage level is unknown.




Categories


ICAO ADREP,
              ADREP Taxonomy












Feedback