ESARR5











  ESARR5









Article Information

Category:



ESARRs 








Content source:




 EUROCONTROL





 









Content control:




 EUROCONTROL





 















ESARR 5 - ATM Services’ Personnel
Description
ESARR 5 sets out the general safety regulatory requirements for all ATM services’ personnel responsible for safety related tasks within the provision of ATM services across the European Civil Aviation Conference (ECAC) area, as well as specific safety regulatory requirements for air traffic controllers and for engineering and technical personnel undertaking operational safety related tasks.
The overall objective of the requirement is to ensure the competency and, where applicable, the satisfaction of medical requirements, of ATM services’ personnel responsible for safety related tasks within the provision of ATM services.
ESARR 5 develops further ESARR3 requirements on competency. The basis for development of the safety regulatory requirements relating to air traffic controllers is International Civil Aviation Organisation (ICAO) Annex 1. It is to be noted that provisions are not foreseen in ICAO SARPS in respect of the mentioned category of technical and engineering ATM personnel.
Applicability
ESARR 5 requirements apply to:

Designated authority for the safety regulation of ATM personnel.
Air traffic services (ATS) provider organisation.
Operating organisation, in cases of provision of technical and engineering services by organisation different from the ATS provider.
Individual personnel.

Responsibilities
The designated authority for the safety regulation of ATM personal is required to:

Issue licenses in compliance with the obligatory provisions of ICAO Annex 1 and ESARR 5.
Approve competence examiners and assessors.
Ensure training requirements and competence schemes are complied with by ATS providers and individual personnel.
Establish requirements to ensure ongoing competence of the air traffic controllers.
Issue appropriate safety regulations for engineering and technical personnel who undertake operational safety related tasks.
Implement an appropriate audit process.

The ATS provider/operating organisation is required to:

Apply unit training plans and competence schemes approved by the designated authority.
Implement fully documented competence monitoring and assessment procedures.
Ensure notification of the designated authority as required.

Individual personnel, when undertaking their tasks, are required to comply with the competence scheme, conditions and requirements determined by the national regulatory authority and the ATS provider/operating organisation.
The competence of ATM personnel and, where applicable, their satisfaction of medical requirements, are fundamental elements of safety achievement, and therefore of safety management, in the provision of ATM services. The application of ESARR 5 aims to establish harmonised minimum levels of competency and proficiency for staff having specific ATM safety responsibilities.
Transposition into Community Law
ESARR 5 has been transposed into European Community law by:

Directive 2006/23/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 5 April 2006 on a Community air traffic controller licence - For the part concerining Community ATCO licensing, and
Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) No 1035/2011 of 17 October 2011 laying down common requirements for the provision of air navigation services and amending Regulations (EC) No 482/2008 and (EU) No 691/2010 - For the part dealing with requirements for technical personnel.

For more detailed informaion go to article: Transposition of ESARRs into Community Law
Further Reading
EUROCONTROL

ESARR5 - Safety Regulatory Requirement for ATM Services' Personnel;
Explanatory material on ESARR 5 Requirements for Air Traffic Control Officers- Part A & Part B;
ESARR 5 and Related Safety Oversight for ATCOs-Part A Licence;
Explanatory Material on ESARR 5 Requirements for Engineers and Technical Personnel;
Regulatory Context in ATSEP Competence EUROCONTROL, October, 2008


ESARR 5 and Related Safety Oversight for Engineering and Technical Personnel;
Consistency between ESARR 5 and ICAO SARPs;
Acceptable Means of Compliance with ESARR 5;
ESARR 5 Explanatory Elements- ATSEP Competence Questionnaire to competence of the personnel, October, 2008
Assessment of the European Manual of Personnel Licensing - Air Traffic Controllers as a Means of Compliance with ESARR 5;
ATSEP Competence- ESARR 5 Requirements ESARR 5 requirements for ATSEPs, October, 2008
Proceedings of EUROCONTROL Workshop on ESARR 5 and ATCO Licensing 22/24 May 2002.





Categories


ESARRs












Feedback