Structured Interview











  Structured Interview









Article Information

Category:



Human Factors Methods













Description
Structured Interviews normally take place after specific exercises, when a trained interviewer asks a controller for his opinions and suggestions on a series of specific aspects of the simulation.
Discussion/References
Structured Interviews are widely used in opinion sampling, and there is an extensive literature.

EEC Report # 164 (David and Noonan, 1983) discusses the problems involved with structured interviews in some detail.
Dubey (1998), a social anthropologist’s study of real-time simulation, involved the immersion of a social anthropologist in groups of controllers visiting the centre. He found, among other valuable insights, that controllers’ responses to interviews were often moderated by their knowledge of the results expected of a simulation, and, consciously, or unconsciously, were affected by underlying attitudes to the simulation. For example, controllers often complain about the validity of the traffic sample, since this is an element of the simulation in which they are acknowledged experts, when they are concerned about other issues, such as training or team formation, where they do not have the vocabulary to express their reservations. (Controllers have complained of the difficulty of discussing the simulation in English, when they were in fact speaking French).
Oppenheim A.N., Questionnaire Design, Interviewing and Attitude Measurement, 1992 (1st ed. 1996), Cassel: London (ISBN 1 85567 044 5) Gives a good general summary. It provides sufficient information on interviewing techniques, and the extraction and analysis of data from interviews, although in a very general context.





Categories


Human Factors Methods












Generics


Type of method
Subjective


Structured Interviews are inherently subjective.


Target of method
Strain


Structured Interviews generally form a sort of semi-structured discussion. It is a major skill of the interviewer to extract an impression of what the controllers really feel about the organisations being examined.


Time Scale of method
Days


Structured Interviews can only be held after enough exercises have been completed for the controllers to have formed opinions.


Portability of method
Yes


In principle, Structured Interviews, since they need no equipment, could be held wherever and whenever convenient - after a working shift in an operational centre, for example.


Observer Effect
Yes


Controllers, like any other subjects, are extremely sensitive to minor, nearly subliminal signals from the interviewer.


Context of studies


Laboratory studies
Use


 


Simulation studies
Avoid


 


Field studies
Avoid


 


Potential problems with the method


Failure risk
Moderate


Sometimes, the interviewer may not be able to obtain definite responses to some questions. Inexperienced interviewers, or those unfamiliar with ATC language or attitudes may lose the confidence of the controller, and obtain no useful data.


Bias risk
Moderate


Controllers generally do their best to give truthful, realistic answers to the problems they see. Sometimes, however, they may give responses that are either what they think the group as a whole will think, or what they think the observer wants to hear.


Ethical problems
Privacy


In general, structured interview findings should be regarded as confidential, although opinions or observations elicited during structured interviews may be raised during general de-briefings provided the originator is not identifiable.


Costs of the method


Staff Cost
High


Structured Interviews must always be carried out by skilled interviewers, preferably experienced controllers, capable of understanding the controllers concerns and judging their relevance and seriousness.


Set-up Cost
Low, Moderate


Usually, the interviewers must be given some preliminary training, including rehearsals and video-recorded trial interviews.


Running Cost
Moderate, High


The cost of the high level staff required puts up the cost, although they may have other duties during the actual simulation. A private room is needed for each structured interview.


Analysis Cost
Low


Structured Interviews are summarised by the interviewer at the time.


Analysis data


Analysis Speed
Slow


Conclusions are available after the structured interview, which usually takes place after the exercise. Since interviews take about 30 minutes, the results are probably not available in time for any debriefing.


Data Automation
No


Data collection, strictly speaking, cannot be automated. The results of the structured interview can be stored in a questionnaire-like format for collation etc.


Analysis Automation
No


Not needed. Not suitable.


Status
Established


Routinely used.















Feedback