Hot Spots at Aerodromes











  Hot Spots at Aerodromes









Article Information

Category:



Runway Incursion 








Content source:




 SKYbrary





 









Content control:




 EUROCONTROL





 















Definition
A location on an aerodrome movement area with a history or potential risk of collision or runway incursion, and where heightened attention by pilots/drivers is necessary. (ICAO Doc 9870, Manual on the Prevention of Runway Incursions)
Description
ICAO PANS-ATM Doc 4444 defines a runway incursion as: "Any occurrence at an aerodrome involving the incorrect presence of an aircraft, vehicle or person on the protected area of a surface designated for the landing and take-off of aircraft."
Many aerodromes have hazardous locations on taxiways and/or runways where incidents have occurred. Such positions are commonly referred to as "hot spots".
Formal definition of hotspots can alert pilots and drivers to movement area design issues which cannot be readily mitigated by signage or lighting or where poor visibility may contribute to reduced Situational Awareness in relation to active runways. It can also alert to potentially critical points where the visual control room (VCR) or other surveillance systems are less effective usually.
ICAO recommends the local generation of AIP charts to show runway hotspots, which, once issued, must be kept up to date and revised as necessary. Many airlines now specifically require Captains to brief hot spots with their First Officers after receiving a taxi clearance.
All identified hot spots should be examined for short or long term opportunities for mitigation of or removal of the hazard identified. These actions include:

awareness campaigns;
enhanced visual aids (signs, markings and lights);
use of alternative routings;
changes to the movement area infrastructure, such as construction of new taxiways, and decommissioning of taxiways;
closed-circuit television (CCTV) for critical VCR sight line deficiencies.

Two ICAO examples of runway hotspot charts are shown below.

Sample Aerodrome/Heliport Chart
 

Sample Chart
Related Articles

Runway Incursion
Local Runway Safety Teams (LRST)
Controller Detection of Manoeuvring Area Conflicts

Further Reading

ICAO Doc 9870: Manual on the Prevention of Runway Incursions
ICAO Annex 4 Aeronautical Charts, Chapters 13,14 & 15
ICAO Doc 4444 PANS-ATM, Chapter 7
ICAO Doc 9870 App C - Air Traffic Control Best Practices
European Action Plan for the Prevention of Runway Incursions, Appendix B - Guidelines for Local Runway Safety Teams
European Action Plan for the Prevention of Runway Incursions, Appendix H - Aeronautical Information Management Guidance
FAA Instrument Procedures Handbook, Chapter 2;
The FAA Office of Runway Safety website has links to the FAA regions that maintain a complete list of airports with hot spots
Airbus FOBN - Preventing Runway Incursions
An example of a clearly written and unambigous Aerodrome Manual: Manchester UK - 2013 Aerodrome Manual, version 3
UK CAA CAP 1069 ‘Preventing runway incursions at small aerodromes’
Network Manager Safety Study - Aerodrome 'Hot Spot' Survey, EUROCONTROL, March 2016
Final report: Problematic Taxiway Geometry Study Overview, FAA, January 2018





Categories


Runway Incursion,
              Airport Design and Infrastructure












Feedback