De-briefing











  De-briefing









Article Information

Category:



Human Factors Methods













Description
After each exercise a meeting of the controllers and simulation staff is held to discuss the events of the exercise. This is, in practice, the main input from the controllers into the simulation De-briefings generally form a sort of semi-structured discussion. It is a major skill of the project leader to extract an impression of what the controllers really feel about the organisations being examined, while they may prefer to concentrate on immediate technical problems.
Discussion/References
Debriefing techniques are essentially a craft skill, and are rarely discussed in the published literature.

EEC Report #164 (David and Noonan, 1983) discusses EEC experience with debriefing in real-time ATC simulations
EEC Report #348 (Dubey 2000) is a summary of a social anthropologist’s study of real-time simulation. Although it does not discuss de-briefing techniques explicitly, it contains some observations on the social context of real-time simulation which should be born in mind by anyone carrying out de-briefing.
Oppenheim A.N., 1992 provides general guidance on debriefing and interviewing, although it treats single interviews, rather than groups.





Categories


Human Factors Methods












Generics


Type of method
Subjective


Debriefings are inherently subjective.


Target of method
Strain


Time Scale of method
Hours


De-briefings can only be held after the exercise has been completed.


Portability of method
Yes


In principle, de-briefings, since they need no equipment, could be held wherever and whenever convenient - after a working shift in an operational centre, for example.


Observer Effect
Yes


The presence of ‘outsiders’ particularly senior officials of the home administration may inhibit controllers. A particularly aggressive or determined controller may ‘drown out’ the opinions of less assertive members of the group. A special case of this may occur in international simulations, where opinion may be affected by national politics.


Context of studies


Laboratory studies
Use


 


Simulation studies
Use


 


Field studies
Use


 


Potential problems with the method


Failure risk
None


In principle, the project leader should emerge from the de-briefing sessions with a clear idea of what the controllers think about the organisation being tested. Inexperienced project leaders may not be able to control a large group, or evaluate group responses.


Bias risk
None


Controllers generally do their best to give truthful, realistic answers to the problems they see. More generally, controllers tend to judge a situation ‘holistically’ - a software bug that is irrelevant to the task may cause them to reject an organisation out of hand.


Ethical problems
None


Nothing specific.


Costs of the method


Staff Cost
High


De-briefings must always be carried out by skilled experienced controllers, capable of understanding the controllers concerns and judging their relevance and seriousness. EEC recruits senior controllers as assistant project leaders and trains them by apprenticeship to experienced project leaders.


Set-up Cost
Low


In principle, the project leader should spend some time thinking about the potential problems that may arise. In reality, he is generally too busy. Any major problems will be drawn to his attention by the controllers.


Running Cost
Low


All that is needed is the use of a conference room. In a pinch, the de-briefing may be done in the simulated operations room.


Analysis Cost
Nil


De-briefings are summarised by the project leader at the time. Formal analysis is neither required nor needed.


Analysis data


Analysis Speed
Immediate


Conclusions are available immediately.


Data Automation
No


Not needed.


Analysis Automation
No


Not needed nor suitable.


Status
Established


Routinely used in simulations.















Feedback