Hindsight 18











  Hindsight 18









Article Information

Category:



General 








Content source:




 EUROCONTROL





 









Content control:




 SKYbrary





 
















Published in December 2013, HindSight 18 focused on Justice and Safety.
HindSight 18 Articles
Keynote

Safer Network for Less: by Joe Sultana.

Editorial

Just Culture in Doubt: Editorial by Tzvetomir Blajev.
A new just culture algorith: by Professor Sidney Dekker
Is justice really important for safety?: by Professor Erik Hollnagel.
Everything you always wanted to know about just culture (but were afraid to ask): by Toni Licu, Marc Baumgartner, and Roderick van Dam..
Just culture in aviation: dynamics and deliverables: by Toni Licu and Roderick van Dam.

The View from Above

Inconsistency under the law: by Captain Ed Pooley

Case Study

Case Study - The friend: by Bengt Collin.

Comment 1: by Eileen Senger.
Comment 2: by Captain Dirk DeWinter.
Comment 3: by Job Bruggen.



From the Briefing Room

"Human Error" - The handicap of human factors, safety and justice: by Dr Steven Shorrock.
Experience on task in a just culture: by Captain Dirk DeWinter.
Just culture verses criminalisation - moving forward: by Jeronimo Coelho dos Santos.
Why we need positive examples in our just culture: by Job Bruggen.
A just culture in aviation - who is an expert?: by Dr Francis Schubert..
Just culture in the real world: flight safety and the realities of society: by Paul Reuter.
Just culture and American jurisprudence: by Tom Lintner and Tom Dunlop.
Getting the benefit from just culture - still some way to go: by Ian Weston.
Why is it necessary to criminalise negligent behaviour?: by Sara Panelli and Massimo Scarabello
Justice and Safety: by A C (Fred) Bijlsma.
Justice and safety: the art of making mistakes, People sell washing machines - robots fly aeroplanes?: by Heli Koivu.

Dossier

The 2004 Cagliari accident and its aftermath

The accident investigation: by Captain Ed Pooley.
The judicial aftermath: by Carmelo Starrantino and Marcello Finocchiaro.
Air cops and mountain tops: by Alberto Iovino.
If it happened in your country, what would the judgement have been?: by Marcello Scala.



HindSight Situational Example

Loss of Separation

A Book Review

Misunderstandings in Air Traffic Communication: by Graham Elliott.

Related SKYbrary Artciles

Just Culture

Click here to view other editions of HindSight
Register to Receive Your Copy of HindSight Magazine
Register here for a hardcopy of HindSight magazine to be sent to you by post every time a new edition is published




Categories


General












Feedback