Hindsight 35











  Hindsight 35









Article Information

Category:



General 








Content source:




 EUROCONTROL





 









Content control:




 SKYbrary





 
















HindSight 35
Download the full HindSight 35 magazine here
Published in September 2023, HindSight 35 focused on the theme of Just Culture...Revisited.
Welcome
Welcome to issue 35 of EUROCONTROL’s HindSight magazine, the magazine on human and organisational factors in operations, in air traffic management and beyond.
This issue is on the theme of Just Culture…Revisited. Once again you will find a diverse set of articles from a diverse set of authors in the context of aviation, maritime, rail and healthcare. The articles reflect Just Culture at the corporate and judicial levels from the perspectives of personal experience, professional practice, theory, research, regulation, and law.
At the heart of HindSight magazine is the idea that we can and should learn from multiple perspectives. Especially for topics such as Just Culture, there can be tensions between these perspective, which are opportunities for learning and growth. There are differences between the perspectives of front-line staff, safety specialists, legal experts, managers, and social scientists, and senior managers, and of course citizens. What is ‘just’? How should we conceptualise Just Culture? How should we design and implement regulations, policies and protocols relating to Just Culture? What gets in the way of Just Culture? More than most other topics, this is one that can arouse strong feelings and opinions.
In this issue, leading voices from the ground and air share perspectives on these questions. It is also recommended to review issue 18 of HindSight on Justice & Safety. The two issues together offer a rare and comprehensive set of insights.
Special thanks are extended to the authors and the operational reviewers, who help to ensure that HindSight magazine is relevant, interesting and useful. While the primary readers are operational staff, especially those involved in aviation, it is read much more widely, by different people in different sectors, especially those where safety and business continuity is critical.
We hope that the articles trigger conversations between you and others. Do your operational and nonoperational colleagues know about HindSight? Please let them know. Search ‘SKYbrary HindSight’ for all issues, covering a wide variety of themes.
HindSight 35 Articles
Welcome

Welcome, by Steven Shorrock

Forewords

EUROCONTROL Foreword, by Tony Licu
Invited Foreword, by Adrian Cojoc

Editorial

Who are we to judge? From work-as-done to work-as-judged, by Steven Shorrock

Reflections on Just Culture

Unravelling the complexities of justice: Lessons from the Erebus disaster, by Lea-Sophie Vink
Moving beyond the good, the bad and the ugly: Just, blame, and no-blame cultures revisited, by Martina Ivaldi, Fabrizio Bracco and Marcello Scala
Epistemic injustice: The dog has now been removed from the tail, by Joji Waites and Captain James Burnell 
Why is it just so difficult? Barriers to ‘Just Culture’ in the real world, by Steven Shorrock

Just Culture in Practice

Just Culture: What have we done for you?, by Tony Licu, Radu Cioponea, and Steven Shorrock
Implementing Just Culture in practice: The ‘JC 11’ methodology, by Maria Kovacova
Whether report? Understanding Just Culture through safety reporting, by James Norman

Artificial Intelligence 

Artificial intelligence and the Just Culture principle, by Federico Franchina
Just Culture and artificial intelligence: Do we need to expand the Just Culture playbook?, by Marc Baumgartner and Stathis Malakis

Legal and Judicial Perspectives

Reconciling criminal law enforcement with Just Culture, by Katja van Bijsterveldt and Aco Verhaegh
Just Culture done to you or with you? An alternative to prosecution in general aviation, by Bram Couteaux and Anthony Smoker
Just Culture in Switzerland: An eight-year ordeal, by Fabian Hummel and Marc Baumgartner

Views from Elsewhere

Just Culture in healthcare: The dawn of a new era, by Suzette Woodward
Just Culture or safety learning culture? The maritime industry charts its course, by Barry Kirwan
Embracing a learning culture at a UK rail operator, by Adam Johns
Applying Just Culture in rail: Drawing parallels from aviation, by Michaela Schwarz and Nora Balfe

Human Performance in the Spotlight

Human performance in the spotlight: ‘Human error’ and ‘honest mistakes’, by Steven Shorrock

Diversity and Inclusion

Diversability and restorative Just Culture, by Milena Bowman

In Conversation

From cockpits to courtrooms: Looking back on a 50-year journey. A conversation with Tom Lintner, by Steven Shorrock

The Lighter Side

Cartoons, by Daniel Avram

Other Content

Front Cover
Bookshelf
SKYclips
HindSight 36 Call for Articles
Writing for HindSight
Back Cover

All Formats of HindSight 35

Low resolution
High resolution
High resolution with crop marks (for printshop)

See all editions of HindSight magazine
 




Categories


General









 














Feedback