ES2 2013











  ES2 2013









Article Information

Category:



General 








Content source:




 SKYbrary





 









Content control:




 SKYbrary





 















In 2013, three working sessions took place during the year. A small change happened starting from this year, the CEOs Meeting that used to take place every year, was moved in 2015.
Go back to all editions of ES2 Meetings
WS 01-13
This working session had "Software Assurance" as main subject. Further discussions related to SWALs, industry and ANSP contributions in Safety Assessments and Software Assessments followed. This workshop was held at Luxembourg, between 07-08th of May.
Below is the list of presentations from the meeting:

ES2 WS 01-14 Agenda
EASA Approach for Assessing the 482/2008 Compliance
BSA-ANS WKS-SAF-SW
ES2 and Lessons Learned
A Practical Implementation of EC 482/2008 in an ANSP BELGOCONTROL
THALES Presentation
NAV Portugal Implementing EC 482/2008
Spftware Safety in Context
MUAC SSAS Process
A Little Change NATS
ARTAS - What about Our Safety Documentation?
Lessons Learned in European and Overseas ScenariosIDS
ANA Software Safety Assurance System CERTISA
Safety Training at EUROCONTROL
ES2 2013 Programme -Discussion and Way Forward

WS 02-13
The second meeting of this year took place at Dublin, between 26-27th of September. Its theme was "A Systems Perspective on People and Safety". This seminar was a unique opportunity to hear from three of the world’s most respected thinkers on systems safety: Professor Chris Johnson (University of Glasgow), Professor David Woods (Ohio State University), and Professor Erik Hollnagel (University of Southern Denmark). With latest theory and practical examples from industry, participants had the chance to learn how people create safety in complex systems - sometimes against the odds.
Below you can find the list of the presentations from this meeting:

ES2 WS 02-13 Agenda
Human Performance in Degraded Modes of Operations Chris Johnson
Human Performance in Cyber Security Chris Johnson
Navigating Seas of Complexity David Woods
Non-Compliant Approaches vs. Loss of Separation
Non-Compliant Approach: The Big C for Compliance
Mini-course: Safety I and Safety II Erik Hollnagel
Why Things Go Right - Proactive Safety

WS 03-13
The third and the last working session of this year took place at Madrid, between 21-22nd of November. The meeting's name was "How to Evolve ATM Safety Investigations While preserving Just Culture"". This meeting focused on reality of Safety Investigations within ATM and other aviation organisations, taking into account the applicable national and international legal environment but also emerging paradigms and some related principles.
Below is a list with the presentations from the meeting:

ES2 WS 03 Agenda
Safety Investigations and Justice
EU Safety Investigations and Just Culture EASA
Feedback from Just Culture Measurements EASA
Safety First APROCTA
Safety Investigations and Just Culture AENA
Just Culture from IFATCA Perspective
Prosecutor Expert Course - Interests of Aviation Safety and Just Culture
Safety Investigations Review of Accidents and Incidents Investigation Models
A Real World Evolution in Safety ALOFT
Ten Principles for Consideration of Human Performance and System
Non-Invasive Neutral Approach RATCA
Beginning to Get the benefits from Just Culture Ian Weston

Go back to all editions of ES2 Meetings




Categories


General












Feedback