Surveillance and Flight Information Service











  Surveillance and Flight Information Service









Article Information

Category:



General 








Content source:




 SKYbrary





 









Content control:




 SKYbrary





 















Description
A surveillance system is normally one of the most important tools of an approach or en-route air traffic controller as it allows them to safely and efficiently handle a significantly larger number of aircraft compared to the procedural control scenario. FIS officers can also use such systems as part of their job, albeit with some limitations. This is because the FIS officer is not an air traffic controller, and therefore does not provide ATC service. Therefore, they do not use surveillance data for e.g. vectoring, conflict solving or monitoring aircraft compliance with the instructions issued. 
The use of a surveillance system in the provision of flight information service does not relieve the pilot-in-command of any responsibilities. While the FIS officer may provide information or suggestions about various risks (traffic, weather, notified airspace, etc.), it is ultimately up to the pilot-in-command to decide on the course of action.
The information presented on a situation display may be used to provide identified aircraft with:
* information about potentially conflicting traffic and suggestions for avoiding action.
* information about adverse weather and advise on how to circumnavigate it. It should be kept in mind, however, that such information by ground systems may not be accurate or up to date.
* provision of navigation assistance.
Related Articles

Flight Information Service (FIS)
Air Traffic Control Service (ATC)
Air Traffic Service (ATS)
The FIS Officer
Surveillance
Navigation Assistance to VFR Flights
Non-Aerodrome FIS Outside of Controlled Airspace (UK)
VFR Loss of Positional Orientation: Guidance for Controllers

Further Reading

ICAO Doc 4444 PANS-ATM





Categories


General












Feedback