Regulation 2021/116 Common Project One











  Regulation 2021/116 Common Project One









Article Information

Category:



Single European Sky 








Content source:




 SKYbrary





 









Content control:




 SKYbrary





 















COMMISSION IMPLEMENTING REGULATION (EU) 2021/116 of 1 February 2021 on the establishment of the Common Project One supporting the implementation of the European Air Traffic Management Master Plan provided for in Regulation (EC) No 550/2004 of the European Parliament and of the Council, amending Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) No 409/2013 and repealing Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) No 716/2014 - text published in the Official Journal of the European Union
Objective
To establish Common Project One (CP1) to support the implementation of the European Air Traffic Management (ATM) Master Plan.
Summary
The CP1 comprises the following ATM functionalities:

AF1 - extended arrival management and integrated AMAN/DMAN in the high-density terminal manoeuvring areas. This functionality improves the precision of the approach trajectory and facilitates air traffic sequencing at an earlier stage and the optimum utilisation of runways, integrating the AMAN and DMAN sequences, by deploying specific ATM solutions.
AF2 - airport integration and throughput. This functionality facilitates the provision of approach and aerodrome control services by improving runway safety and throughput, enhancing taxi integration and safety and reducing hazardous situations on the runway.
AF3 - flexible airspace management and free route airspace. This functionality combines the operation of flexible airspace management and free route and enables airspace users to fly as closely as possible to their preferred trajectory without being constrained by fixed airspace structures or fixed route networks. It allows operations that require segregation to take place safely and flexibly and with minimum impact on other airspace users.
AF4 - network collaborative management. This functionality improves the European ATM network performance, notably capacity and flight efficiency, through exchange, modification and management of trajectory information. It contributes to the implementation of a collaborative network for planning and decision-making, which enables the implementation of flight- and flow-centric operations.
AF5 - system wide information management. This functionality consists of standards and infrastructure enabling the development, implementation and evolution of services for information exchange between operational stakeholders via interoperable services which are built on SWIM standards and are delivered through an internet protocol.
AF6 - initial trajectory information sharing (i4D). This functionality improves the use of target times and trajectory information, including where available the use of on-board 4D trajectory data by the ground ATC system and Network Manager systems, implying fewer tactical interventions and improved de-confliction situation.

Annex to the Regulation
The Annex to the Regulation elaborates on the following aspects of each of the ATM functionalities:

Operational and technical scope. This part defines the relevant sub-functionalities with a general description and relevant system requirements.
Geographical Scope. This part defines the aerodromes or airspace volumes where the functionalities and sub-functionalities are to be implemented.
Stakeholders required to implement the functionality and the implementation target dates. This part lists the relevant stakeholders, the tasks they must implement and the implementation target dates.
Need for synchronisation. This part elaborates on the need and benefits of synchornisation between stakeholders when implementing the functionalities and sub-finctionalities.
The expected environmental improvements. This part describes the benefits from the implementation of the functionality and the sub-functionalities.
Interdependencies with other ATM functionalities. This part describes the relation between a functionality or sub-functionality with other functionalities or sub-functionalities within CP1.

Amendment of Regulation 409/2013
The bullet points below contain the most important updates to Regulation 409/2013:

Seven definitions are updated and six new definitions are added.
The description of the prupose of common projects is updated.
A requirement for common structure of the projects is introduced. Each ATM functionality and sub-functionality must be described by the following characteristics: 

essential operational changes they contribute to;
the operational and technical scope;
the geographical scope;
the operation stakeholders that are required to implement them;
the synchronisation requirements;
the implementation target dates;
the interdependencies with other functionalities or sub-functionalities.


The role of EASA in the setup and implementation of common projects is extended.

Entry into Force
This Regulation entered into force in February 2023.
This Regulation repeals Regulation 716/2014.
Regulation 2021/116 Common Project One (OJ, 02.02.2021)
Related Regulations

Regulation 550/2004
Regulation 409/2013
Regulation 2018/1139

Further  Reading
European Commission

EUR-Lex Portal: Regulation 2021/116 (available in different languages and file formats) 





Categories


Single European Sky,
              SES Implementing Rules












Feedback