Hindsight 22











  Hindsight 22









Article Information

Category:



General 








Content source:




 EUROCONTROL





 









Content control:




 SKYbrary





 
















Published in June 2016, HindSight 22 focused on Safety Nets.
HindSight 22 Articles
Keynote

Keynote: by Frank Brenner.

Editorial

Sense of Safety: Editorial by Tzvetomir Blajev.
From Homo Sapiens to Homo Sospitas: by Professor Sidney Dekker.

The View from Above

Safety Nets: A continuing journey with en route successes: by Captain Ed Pooley.

Case Study

Case Study - Brent's Brabant 601: by Bengt Collin.

Comment 1: by Dragan Milanovski.
Comment 2: by Captain Ed Pooley.
Comment 3: by Shota Janashia.
Comment 4: by Captain Pradeep Deshpande.



From the Briefing Room

Why display TCAS Resolution Advisories at controller working positions?: by Tony Licu.
Has EGPWS (TAWS) helped lower the flying risk for commercial transport aircraft?: by Don Bateman.
How much is too much?: by Adrian Bednarek.
Functional Safety Nets from a resilience engineering perspective: by Professor Erik Hollnagel.
Fit for purpose? Questions about alarm system design from theory and practice: by Dr Steven Shorrock.
Runway safety alerts: how fast can we react to them?: by Gerard van Es.
The air traffic controller as a "safety net": perhaps the most important one?: by Florence-Marie Jegoux.
Safety nets and automation: how to get the balance right: by Colin Gill.
Flavours of Short Term Conflict Alert: by Ben Bakker.
Safety nets to protect against fatigue: by Jean-Jacques Speyer.
Remote tower technologies and the safety nets of tomorrow: by Raluca Tudorica and Rory Hedman.
Collision Avoidance for Light Aircraft: by Dr Volker Huck.
There is no cause for alarm if you have some information on alerts to begin with: by Roger Lane.
The new kid on the block: by Stanislaw Drozdowski.
The continual improvement of safety nets: by Rod Howell.
How to synchronise different safety nets: by Captain Wolfgang Starke.
Why TCAS Downlinking is a bad idea: by Duncan Auld.
EMAS: A passive safety net for runway overruns: by Stan Koczkodaj.
ROPS: An active safety net for runway overruns: by Logan Jones.

Related SKYbrary Articles

Safety Nets

Register to Receive Your Copy of HindSight Magazine
Register here for a hardcopy of HindSight magazine to be sent to you by post every time a new edition is published
See all editions of HindSight magazine




Categories


General












Feedback