Deep Stall











  Deep Stall









Article Information

Category:



Loss of Control 








Content source:




 SKYbrary





 









Content control:




 The Air Pilots





 















Definition
A Deep Stall, sometimes referred to as a Super Stall, is a particularly dangerous form of stall that results in a substantial reduction or loss of elevator authority making normal stall recovery actions ineffective. In many cases, an aircraft in a Deep Stall might be unrecoverable. This phenomenon affects certain aircraft designs, most notably those with a T-tail configuration.
Description
As the angle of attack of any aerofoil section is increased, the lift will also increase up to a point known as the critical angle. At this angle of attack (typically 15° to 20° for most aerofoil sections) the airflow separates from the upper surface of the wing and this condition is known as a stall. At the stall, lift is significantly reduced, drag is significantly increased and the airflow across, and behind, the wing becomes turbulent.
In an aircraft with a T-tail, the turbulent air in the wake of a stalled mainplane can affect the horizontal stabilizer, substantially reducing the effectiveness of the elevators and potentially negating the ability to recover from the stall by using pitch controls to reduce the mainplane angle of attack.

Deep Stall in a T-tail Aircraft
In the diagram above, the upper aircraft is in normal flight. The lower aircraft is in a stalled condition with a mainplane angle of attack in excess of the critical angle of attack. In the circumstance depicted in the diagram, the angle of attack is such horizontal stabilizers/elevators are in the turbulent airflow aft of the mainplane. This will substantially reduce the effectiveness of the horizontal stabilizer and elevators (and will also result in greatly reduced rudder authority)
Where the aircraft design includes gas turbine engines mounted on the fuselage either side of the tail, the same turbulent airflow affecting the tail surfaces can also affect the engines causing engine stall and surge, further increasing the danger of allowing such an aircraft to enter this Deep Stall condition.
Aircraft with a T-tail design are often configured with a Stick Pusher system to help prevent the mainplane angle of attack from reaching a value that could result in a Deep Stall.
Related Articles

Loss of Control
Stall
Stick Pusher
Unreliable Airspeed Indications

Further Reading
NTSB Safety Alerts on General Aviation risks

Safety Alert 19 - Prevent Aerodynamic Stalls at Low Altitude

ICAO

ICAO Amendment No.3 to PANS-TRG (Doc 9868) - Chapter 7, Upset Prevention and Recovery Training, April 2014

EASA

EASA SIB 2013-02 - Stall and Stick Pusher Training

FAA

FAA AC 120-111 Upset Prevention and Recovery Training, January 2017
SAFO 17009: Airman Certification Standards (ACS): Slow Flight and Stalls, May 2017





Categories


Loss of Control,
              General Aviation












Feedback