Airport Climatology/Northeastern Africa











  Airport Climatology/Northeastern Africa









Article Information

Category:



Weather 








Content source:




 SKYbrary





 









Content control:




 EUROCONTROL





 















The Climate of Northeastern Africa
The climate of Africa ranges from tropical to subarctic on its highest peaks. Its northern half is primarily desert (Köppen climate classification BWh) or arid (Köppen climate classification BSh), while its central and southern areas contain both savanna plains (Köppen climate classification Aw) and very dense jungle (rainforest) (Köppen climate classification Af) regions. In between, there is a convergence where vegetation patterns such as sahel, and steppe dominate. The north African coast (Morocco and Algeria) and Cape Province in South Africa enjoy Mediterranean climates (Köppen climate classification Csa & Csa). The movement of the Intertropical convergence zone, creates a rainy season across central portions of the continent to the south of the Sahara. Southern Africa receives most of its rain from convective clouds in the summer and frontal systems from the west in the winter.
Airports
The following map shows the Köppen climate classification (KCC) for aerodromes across Northeastern Africa which are listed on SKYbrary:









Af
Am
Aw
As




BWh
BWk
BSh
BSk




Csa
Csb
Csc




Cwa
Cwb
Cwc




Cfa
Cfb
Cfc




Dsa
Dsb
Dsc
Dsd




Dwa
Dwb
Dwc
Dwd




Dfa
Dfb
Dfc
Dfd




ET
EF







Climatic and Weather Phenomena Affecting Aviation in Northeastern Africa

Inter-Tropical Convergence Zone. - A feature of the Inter Tropical Convergence Zone (ITCZ) is dense lines of Cumulonimbus (Cb) clouds which can necessitate an aircraft diverging significant distance off track in order to avoid.
Cyclones. - The east coast of Africa, particularly Madagascar, is affected by Tropical Revolving Storms originating in the Indian Ocean.
Sandstorms. - Sandstorms are common in arid and semi-arid areas, particularly the Sahara.





Categories


Weather












Feedback