Flight Safety Foundation (FSF)











  Flight Safety Foundation (FSF)









Article Information

Category:



General 








Content source:




 SKYbrary





 









Content control:




 EUROCONTROL





 















Description
The following is based on information taken from the Flight Safety Foundation website at the time when this article was last edited.
"The Foundation is an international non-profit organization exclusively chartered to provide impartial, independent, expert safety guidance and resources for the aviation and aerospace industry".
The Foundation’s Mission is to "connect, influence and lead global aviation safety" and to:

Develop safety standards.
Provide independent technical assistance.
Disseminate safety information.
Impartially resolve community issues.
Share leading practices.
Globally represent the industry.
Facilitate safety solutions.

The Foundation is in a unique position to identify global safety issues, set priorities and serve as a catalyst to address these concerns through data collection and information sharing, education, advocacy and communications. The Foundation’s effectiveness in bridging proprietary, cultural and political differences in the common cause of safety has earned worldwide respect. The common good of safer air travel continues to inspire individuals and organizations to rise above competitive interests towards shared objectives.
The Foundation publishes AeroSafety World online and in a mobile app. The FSF has engaged in a number of technical initiatives such as the Approach and Landing Accident Reduction (ALAR) project, the Ground Accident Prevention (GAP) project' the Basic Risk Standard (BARS) Program, and the Global Safety Information Project (GSIP).
Safety Conferences
The flight Safety Foundation holds several safety events each year, including the International Air Safety Summit (IASS). The Flight Safety Foundation is also a co-sponsor of the annual Safety Forum.
Further information
For further information, visit Flight Safety Foundation.




Categories


General












Feedback