Hindsight 33











  Hindsight 33









Article Information

Category:



General 








Content source:




 EUROCONTROL





 









Content control:




 SKYbrary





 
















Download the full HindSight 33 magazine here
Published in December 2021, HindSight 33 focused on the theme of Digitalisation and Human Performance.
Welcome
Welcome to issue 33 of EUROCONTROL’s HindSight magazine, the magazine on human and organisational factors in operations, in air traffic management and beyond.
This issue is on the theme of Digitalisation and Human Performance. It includes a wide variety of articles from front-line staff and specialists in technology, change, safety, human factors, and human and organisational performance in aviation. There are also insights from healthcare and pharmaceutical manufacturing. The articles reflect the possibilities for digitalisation and human performance, and the challenges for individuals, teams, organisations, regulators, industries, and societies.
The authors present a variety of perspectives, some of which are quite different. This is an important aspect of HindSight magazine. Some focus more on the possibilities, while others focus more on the pitfalls. It is important that we consider and reconcile these perspectives. As noted in the Editorial, each of us has different attitudes and favoured strategies when it comes to the development and deployment of advanced technology in operations. Taking just one narrow perspective is likely to be problematic.
Digitalisation and human performance are interdependent. We know from decades of research and practice that the two cannot be separated. Ultimately, the success of efforts toward digitalisation depend on people in many roles – technical, operational, human factors, safety, quality, security, training, recruitment, and change management, to name a few.
Special thanks are extended to the authors and the operational reviewers, who help to ensure that HindSight magazine is relevant, interesting and useful. While the primary readers are operational staff, especially those involved in air traffic management, it is read much more widely, by different people in different sectors.
We hope you enjoy reading this issue of HindSight magazine. Please spread the word to others who might be interested in digitalisation and human performance in aviation and beyond.
HindSight 33 Articles
Foreword

EUROCONTROL Foreword, by Tony Licu.
Invited Foreword, by Jan-Gunnar Pedersen.

Editorial

Digitisation at sea: All hands on deck, by Steven Shorrock.

Op-ed

Fallibility and brilliance, by Sarah Sharples
The many meanings of AI, by Erik Hollnagel

The Long Read

Flight deck human factors and digitalisation: Possibilities and dilemmas, a conversation with FAA’s Kathy Abbott, by Steven Shorrock.

Views from the Ground and Air

Building adaptive capacity: Amplifying the combined strenghts of humans and machines, by Rogier Woltjer and Tom Laursen
A regulator's perspective on digitalisation and human performance, by Kathryn Jones and Anna Vereker
Digitalisation vs human flexibility, by Anders Ellerstrand
De-risking FOQA: Flight data management and pilot protection in an ADS-B world, by James Norman
We need to talk about engineering, by Steven Shorrock
Gender diversity in Tech: Things change with time, but you have to change them yourself, by An Exsteen
Disaster recovery and business continuity: A short introduction, by Stefan Maes
MUAC CONOPS 2030, by Robert Parys and Peter Hendrickx
Notamation: Artifical intelligence at work, by Camille Uylenbroeck
Focus on...MUAC technical systems, by members of the MUAC Technical Systems Unit and MUAC Ops Units
Human and organisational factors Q&A: Performance Based Navigation (PBN) routes, by Nuno Cebola 

Views from Elsewhere

Lessons from the introduction of robotic surgery, by Euan Green
We need to fix IT, by Harold Thimbleby
Making automation a team player in biopharma manufacturing, by Jim Ball and Kristen Pham
Human performance in the spotlight: Distributed situation awareness, by Paul Salmon

The Lighter Side

Cartoons

EUROCONTROL News

CANSO-EUROCONTROL Global Resilience Summit attracts world-wide audience

See all editions of HindSight magazine
 
Subscriptions
Follow this link to subscribe to HindSight.




Categories


General












Feedback