Hindsight 25











  Hindsight 25









Article Information

Category:



General 








Content source:




 EUROCONTROL





 









Content control:




 SKYbrary





 
















Published in June 2017, HindSight 25 focused on the potential gap between work-as-imagined and work-as-done.
HindSight 25 Articles
Foreword

Foreword: by Frank Brenner.

Editorial

Greetings!, by Steven Shorrock.
Invitation, participation, connection, by Steven Shorrock.

Op-ed

Malicious compliance, by Sidney Dekker.

From the briefing room

Can we ever imagine how work is done?, by Erik Hollnagel.
Safety is in the eye of the beholder. The “put-yourself-in-other’s-shoes” concept for safety culture, by Florence-Marie Jegoux, Ludovic Mieusset and Sébastien Follet.
Improving runway operations from a car park, by Sebastian Daeunert.
Can competence assessment be used to understand normal work?, by Anne-Mette Petri and Anthony Smoker.
Work-as-done by controllers: A practical approach in the ops room, by Guadalupe Cortés Obrero.
Routine maintenance and routine operations: it takes two to tango, by Maria Kovacova.
‘Safety Holmes’: a dramatised investigation to bring safety to Life, by István Hegedus.
The hidden obvious, by Paula Santos and João Esteves.
Work-as-imagined, work-as-done: A safety management reality check for regulators, by Don Arendt.
Work-as-imagined, work-as-done, and the rule of law, by Massimo Scarabello.

Views from above

Imagine reality, by Wolfgang Starke.
Fatigue management: Procedure vs practice, by Nick Carpenter and Ann Bicknell.
Expertise and compliance, by Antonio Chialastri.
Guiding the practice: The 4Ps, by Immanuel Barshi, Asaf Degani, Robert Mauro and Loukia Loukopoulou.

Views from elsewhere

Introduction
“I wouldn’t have done what they did”, by Martin Bromiley.
Imagining work-as-done in simulation:Lessons from healthcare, by Michael Moneypenny.
The problem of many imaginations, by Suzette Woodward.
Vignettes

And now from something completely different...

A plot twist at the Oscars, by Steven Shorrock.

Online Supplement

Proactive safety with ground handling teams... And pigs might fly!, by Anne Isaac, Jason Cawdron and Harry Harrad.
We should always have it both ways, by Jean-Jacques Speyer.
Special section on Regulation 376/2014 and the law of unintended consequences

Register to Receive Your Copy of HindSight Magazine
Register here for a hardcopy of HindSight magazine to be sent to you by post every time a new edition is published
See all editions of HindSight magazine




Categories


General












Feedback