Managing HF Issues for ATM Projects











  Managing HF Issues for ATM Projects









Article Information

Category:



General 








Content source:




 SKYbrary





 









Content control:




 SKYbrary





 















Why?
The role of Human Factors (HF) in air traffic management (ATM) system design, evaluation and implementation is critical, particularly as a balanced trade-off between humans and automation is necessary and inevitable for future air traffic growth. However, project managers are faced with the following challenges:

HF issues that are complex and difficult to identify
HF interventions made too late
Justifying resources and budget for HF
Acceptance by end users
Applying HF flexibly, not prescriptively

These challenges led to five principles on which to structure the HF Case:

A practical process to capture HF issues
A process to enable timely interventions
Facilitation for project managers to make a case for HF within a project
A structure to enable expert input as well as end user involvement
An adaptable process to meet different project requirements.

What?
The HF Case is a EUROCONTROL process to systematically manage the identification and treatment of HF issues as early as possible in a project’s lifecycle. The HF Case is a five stage process as follows:

The HF Case is a management tool to provide a process to address HF issues for a project. A phase of the process includes the identification and analysis of HF issues, their impacts and mitigation. The application of the HF Case integrates subject matter experts and HF knowledge.

Key outputs from the HF Case are:

HF Action Plan.
HF Recommendations which can feedback into all aspects of ATM system design, implementation and operations.
HF issues to feed into a Safety Case.

When is the HF Case initiated?
The HF Case can be initiated at any stage of a project’s life cycle. Ideally the HF Case should be initiated at the earliest possible stage in the project lifecycle.
Where is the HF Case Applied?
An HF Case can be applied to a number of projects i.e.

Bespoke systems - new, tailor-made systems;
Commercially available systems - ‘Commercial Off The Shelf’ (COTS) systems and products;
Systems implemented elsewhere - main emphasis on local implementation issues;
Modified systems extended by new system level functionality;

In short, an HF Case should consider anyone who is affected by system changes and how their performance contributes to the total system performance.
Further Reading
EUROCONTROL

The Human Factors Case: Guidance for Human Factors Integration European Air Traffic Management
The Human Factors Case: Guidance for Human Factors Integration
Human Factors Integration in Future ATM Systems - Design Concepts and Philosophies
Human Factors Integration in Future ATM Systems - Identification of Tasks and Development Scenarios
Human Factors Integration in Future ATM Systems - Methods and Tools
Proceedings of the Third EUROCONTROL Human Factors Workshop: Integrating Human Factors into the Life Cycle of ATM Systems
Human Factors Module: A Business Case for Human Factors Investment

Direct access the Human factor cases here:

Guidance for Human Factors Integration
HF Case Workarea descriptor
HF Case Workshop Report - April 2008
Support Material for Human Factors Case application
HF Case Issue Mind Map





Categories


General












Feedback