International Standard for Business Aircraft Operations (IS-BAO)











  International Standard for Business Aircraft Operations (IS-BAO)









Article Information

Category:



Business Aviation







Content source:




 SKYbrary





 









Content control:




 SKYbrary





 















Description
The International Standard for Business Aircraft Operations (IS-BAO) is a recommended code of best practices designed to help flight departments achieve high levels of safety and professionalism.
Discussion
The International Standard for Business Aircraft Operations (IS-BAO) was developed by the International Business Aviation Council (IBAC) and its member associations and launched in 2002. It is an industry standard code of best practices, based on the ICAO Standards and Recommended Practices (SARPS). Both the U.S. Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) and Transport Canada, which is Canada's civil aviation authority, recognise IS-BAO as meeting the ICAO standard. The European Committee for Standardization (CEN) also recognises IS-BAO as an industry standard for business aircraft operations.
IS-BAO is a 'for purchase', multistage, Safety Management System (SMS)-focused programme of procedure development and standarisation, risk identification and mitigation, seminars and audits. The IS-BAO programme is intended to assist an operator in building a company culture that continuously strives for a better, safer way of operating by identifying areas where better risk management would improve safety. IS-BAO conformity has been shown to enhance the confidence of company personnel, customers, and insurance carriers, and help to demonstrate the company’s commitment to continuous improvement and operational excellence.
Process
IS-BAO helps operators enhance safety and adopt industry best practices by challenging them to review their existing safety-related policies, processes and procedures. Following this critical review, the IS-BAO programme then provides the appropriate tools and guidance materials necessary to assist the operator in:

Establishing or enhancing a framework for effective safety and operational processes
Facilitating the implementation of best practices
Developing an SMS appropriate to their specific operational profile

Once the operator's best practices profile has been established, the IS-BAO programme facilitates a process of continuous review and improvement by encouraging employee generated continuous improvement reports and by following an established schedule of internal and external audits.
Further Information
Further information on the IS-BAO programme can be obtained by contacting the International Business Aviation Council or by contacting an IBAC member organisation such as the European Business Aviation Association (EBAA) or the National Business Aviation Association (NBAA).
Related Articles

General Aviation (GA)
Business Aviation
International Business Aviation Council (IBAC)
National Business Aviation Association (NBAA)
Canadian Business Aviation Association (CBAA)
European Business Aviation Association (EBAA)
Safety Management System

Further Reading
ICAO

ICAO Doc 9859 - Safety Management Manual, Fourth Edition - 2018;
ICAO Integrated Safety Management website;





Categories


Business Aviation












Feedback