NMOC in Contingency Operations











  NMOC in Contingency Operations









Article Information

Category:



ANS Contingency Planning







Content source:




 SKYbrary





 









Content control:




 SKYbrary





 















Definition
The Network Manager Operations Centre (NMOC) within EUROCONTROL plays a critical role in planning for and coordinating the response to contingency when the loss of service in one member state can have knock-on effects across the air traffic management (ATM) network.
Objective
The objective of NMOC in contingency planning is to increase network resilience to failures in any ANSP.
Description
The NMOC plays a key role in helping air navigation service providers (ANSPs) prepare for contingency operations - for example, by planning alternate routings that enable network flows to be optimised. In order to do this, each ANSP unit should provide the NMOC with:

Default capacity figures for individual traffic volumes applicable for all contingency phases.
Their contingency airspace reconfiguration in order to enable correct flight plan distribution and relevant air traffic flow control management (ATFCM) measures during a contingency situation.
Lists of route availability applicable for contingency measures, including route structure and flight levels for which contingency flight level allocation scheme (cFLAS) eventually applies.

During a contingency, NMOC will assist ANSPs in providing awareness and communication to all affected ATM partners (including airlines), through its already established communication channels. The NMOC’s aim is to ensure the proper coordination of any ATFCM measures. In addition, NMOC will monitor and, if necessary, reduce the demand of the airlines in response to any capacity reduction across the ATM network in order contribute to safety in the area affected by the ANSP contingency. NMOC will also attempt to alleviate the impact on airlines through ATFCM solution such as re-routing aircraft around the affected area or perhaps calling for more capacity from other ANSPs.
During the recovery from the contingency event, NMOC will continue assist in providing awareness and communication to all affected ATM partners. The aim is to optimise the provision of air traffic services balancing capacity of the ATM network with the demand from the airlines in order to manage the increases in air traffic in a safe, orderly and expeditious way.
Related Articles

Conflict Free Routing under Contingency
Contingency Lifecycle
Delegation of Air Traffic Services
Procedural Corridors for Contingency Operations
Service Continuity

Further reading

For further information on Contingency Planning see the EUROCONTROL, Guidelines for Contingency Planning for Air Navigation Services (including Service Continuity) In particular, information about CFMU’s role in contingency planning is provided in page 68, Section 9.4.2 ‘Role of the CFMU’ and Section 11.4 in the second edition of the guidance.


See also the EUROCONTROL Reference Guide to EUROCONTROL Guidelines for Contingency Planning





Categories


ANS Contingency Planning












Feedback