JAA











  JAA









Article Information

Category:



General 








Content source:




 SKYbrary





 









Content control:




 EUROCONTROL





 















Joint Aviation Authorities
Description
The Joint Aviation Authorities, or JAA, was an associated body of the European Civil Aviation Conference (ECAC) representing the civil aviation regulatory authorities of a number of European States who have agreed to co-operate in developing and implementing common safety regulatory standards and procedures. It was not a regulatory body, regulation being achieved through the member authorities.
The JAA was established in 1970. Originally its objectives were to produce common certification codes for large aeroplanes and for engines in order to meet the needs of European industry and international consortia (e.g. Airbus). After 1987 its work was extended to flight operations, maintenance, licensing and certification/design standards for all classes of aircraft.
The adoption of the Regulation (EC) No 1592/2002 by the European Parliament and the Council of the European Union (EU) and the subsequent establishment of the EASA created a Europe-wide regulatory authority which will eventually absorb all the functions of the JAA. Among the functions which have already been transferred is safety and environmental type-certification of aircraft, engines and parts and approval. Aircraft operations and flight crew licensing were transfered in 2008.
By implementation of the Future of JAA (FUJA) Report (Future of JAA) the JAA transitioned into a new phase as of 1 January 2007. In this new phase the former 'JAA' became 'JAA T' (Transition) which consisted of a temporary Liaison Office (JAA LO) and a Training Office (JAA TO). The offices of JAA LO moved to the premises of European Union Aviation Safety Agency (EASA) in Cologne, Germany in 2007 and closed on 30 June 2009. The JAA TO has now become 'JAAT', a commercial training orgaisation, and remains at the old JAA HQ at Hoofddorp, Netherlands.
Introduction of IR-OPS
Regulation (EC) 965/2012 of the European Commission lays down detailed rules for commercial air transport operations with aeroplanes and helicopters, including ramp inspections of aircraft of operators under the safety oversight of another State when landed at aerodromes located in the territory subject to the provisions of the Treaty. This new regulation, which is generally known as IR-OPS (Implementing Rules – Operations), replaces EU-OPS (Regulation (EC) 859/2008). IR-OPS includes Guidance Material and Acceptable Means of Compliance and Guidance Material (AMC), which supports IR-OPS in the same way as JAR-AMC supported JAR-OPS and EU-OPS.
Annexes I-V of the Regulation – covering authority, organisational, commercial air transport operational requirements and operations requiring specific approval – became applicable as of 28 October 2012. The deadline for establishing compliance with annexes I-V of the Regulation was 28 October 2014.
The deadlines for establishing compliance with annexes VI to VII of commission Regulation (EU) No 965/2012, as later amended by commission Regulation (EU) No 800/2013 of 14 August 2013, are 25 August 2016 (non-commercial operations) and 21 April 2017 (specialised operations).




Categories


General












Feedback