Sleep Measurement











  Sleep Measurement









Article Information

Category:



Human Factors Methods













Description
Measurement of body activity by an Actometer, an electro-mechanical data gathering unit, which records, basically, the amount and frequency of wrist movement.
Discussion/References
References to the use of the method in ATC or similar situations.
An Actometer is a wrist strap-mounted device that registers the movements of the wearer. Since people are generally less active when asleep, it can be used to record objectively when the wearer is asleep. Current versions are digital, providing an output record that can be downloaded to a computer for analysis.
So far, there has been no need for the precision provided by this device in the ATC Context, but it may be worth considering on a future occasion.




Categories


Human Factors Methods












Generics


Type of method
Observation


Target of method
Strain


Time Scale of method
Days


Objective measures of sleep, like subjective sleep logs, show changes on a day-to-day basis at best.


Portability of method
Yes


The Actometer recording unit resembles a large wristwatch, and can be used virtually anywhere.


Observer Effect
No


The presence of the Actometer is rapidly forgotten by the wearer.


Context of studies


Laboratory studies
Avoid


 


Simulation studies
Avoid


 


Field studies
Use


 


Potential problems with the method


Failure risk
High


Empirically, recordings from an Actometer may be disturbed by outside factors. (In particular, the tendency of some users to take it off at night).


Bias risk
Low


It is difficult to envisage biasing factors for this technique.


Ethical problems
Medical


Since an Actometer is worn for complete 24-hour periods, it records the general level of activity throughout the working day, and also during the subject’s off-duty hours. (It is from these records that the start and end of sleep are deduced.) Care must be taken that no other information than the start and end of sleep are obtained from the Actometer form.


Costs of the method


Staff Cost
Low


The only effort required is the down-loading of data at daily intervals.


Set-up Cost
Low


The set-up cost is limited to the acquisition of the Actometer and the installation of the relevant software in a suitable PC system.


Running Cost
Low


Running cost is practically negligible.


Analysis Cost
Low


Analysis programs are provided in the original package.


Analysis data


Analysis Speed
Fast


Data must be transferred from the recording unit to a PC before analysis.


Data Automation
Used


This sort of data can only be collected automatically.


Analysis Automation
Used


Most data analysis is more or less automated in the current circumstances.


Status
Tentative


Tentative - under consideration, has not been tried in ATC contexts.















Feedback