Mediterranean-influenced hot-summer humid continental climate (Dsa)











  Mediterranean-influenced hot-summer humid continental climate (Dsa)









Article Information

Category:



Weather 








Content source:




 SKYbrary





 









Content control:




 SKYbrary





 















Description
Dsa: D = Snow  s = Summer dry a = Hot summer
Description
Mediterranean-influenced (Mediterranean-like, dry summer) hot-summer humid continental climate; these climates are characterized by extreme seasonal changes, winters are very cold with the coldest month averaging below 0 °C (32 °F) (or −3 °C (27 °F)). Summers are hot, with the average temperature of the warmest month above 22 °C (71.6 °F) and at least four months averaging above 10 °C (50 °F). Although technically humid continental, these areas are relatively dry with 500 mm (20 inches) of rain and melted snow a year. The could be called subhumid but not dry climates. At least three times as much precipitation in the wettest month of winter as in the driest month of summer, and the driest month of summer receives less than 30 mm.
Dsa climates are rare; they are generally restricted to elevated areas adjacent to Mediterranean climate regions with a Csa climate well inland to ensure hot summers and cold winters. They are generally found in the highly elevated areas of south-eastern Turkey, north-western Iran and parts of Central Asia, and the Western United States.
Examples of airports with a Dfa climate include Salt Lake City, Utah, USA, Arak, Iran, and Chitral, Pakistan.

Köppen–Geiger climate classification map for Humid continental climates: Hot summer subtype (Dfa, Dwa, Dsa) - source: wikicommons, authors:  Beck, H.E., Zimmermann, N. E., McVicar, T. R., Vergopolan, N., Berg, A., & Wood, E. F., 2018
Flight safety and planning considerations
Cold winters - be mindful of altimeter temperature error correction. Performance limitations in high summer temperatures.
Related articles

Koppen climate classification system (KCC)





Categories


Weather,
              Climate Classification












Feedback