Delta Rhythm











  Delta Rhythm









Article Information

Category:



Human Factors Methods













Description
Traditionally, the traces obtained by Electroencephalography are analysed by Fourier analysis, which decomposes any signal into sine-wave components with varying frequencies.
The Delta rhythm (approximately 1-3 Hz) is the slowest rhythm normally recorded.
Discussion/Reference
The Delta rhythm (approximately 1-3 Hz) is the slowest rhythm normally recorded. According to the text books, it is normally occurs in small children and in some physiological mental disturbances.
Cabon et al (1997), however, found that a surprisingly high level of delta rhythm could be observed when controllers were under relatively low workloads, diminishing significantly when the workload increased.




Categories


Human Factors Methods












Generics


Type of method
Electroencephalography


Target of method
Strain


The presence of Alpha rhythm EEG is conventionally taken as an indication that the brain is ‘idling’.


Time Scale of method
Seconds, Minutes


EEG signals have a frequency range up to 30-40Hz. To carry out Fourier analysis epochs of several seconds are needed.


Portability of method
No


It is sufficiently difficult to obtain EEG readings under laboratory conditions, and usually requires a trolley of equipment for each individual.


Observer Effect
No


The activity recorded by EEG measurements is not normally under the control of the controller.


Context of studies


Laboratory studies
Use


 


Simulation studies
Use


 


Field studies
Avoid


 


Potential problems with the method


Failure risk
Moderate


Surprisingly good quality EEG signals can be recorded in simulation and in real life control rooms. This is probably because most electronic activity in these locations involves much higher frequencies.


Bias risk
Possible


We do not really know enough about EEG to say what it can be affected by, although some observation of specific elements is available.


Ethical problems
Medical


We do not examine EEG records for traces of abnormality, which is the proper study of the medical profession.


Costs of the method


Staff Cost
High


Electroencephalography usually needs at least one post-doctoral level supervisor, a skilled EEG technician and one specially trained observer per controller observed.


Set-up Cost
High


EEG requires expensive equipment, and considerable preparation before each exercise.


Running Cost
High


EEG tends to require specialised recording equipment, and the volume of data produced usually requires considerable control activity in the course of a simulation.


Analysis Cost
High


The cost of EEG analysis is largely that of the specialised programs, and peripherals required. Most EEG systems, having been designed for clinical use, are self contained, and require considerable attention in use.


Analysis data


Analysis Speed
Slow


Although EEG analysis is usually carried out by computer, the interpretation of the analysis usually seems to contain a certain subjective element. In addition, EEG is liable to artefacts, usually due to displacement of cable leads, or chewing or blinking by the subject.


Data Automation
Yes


Data can only be collected automatically.


Analysis Automation
No


The analysis of EEG is, in general, automated - usually by Fourier analysis, but the interpretation of the results is not normally susceptible to automation.


Status
Tested


This method has been used in a number of relevant studies, at EEC and elsewhere.















Feedback