FAA Integrated Oversight Philosophy











  FAA Integrated Oversight Philosophy









Article Information

Category:



Monitoring & Oversight 








Content source:




 SKYbrary





 









Content control:




 SKYbrary





 















Description
The U.S. Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) describes its Integrated Oversight Philosophy as “the core set of principles for evolving the FAA’s safety oversight systems” and that it is part of the agency’s “culture shift to be proactive and collaborative in using safety management principles to address risk.”
FAA Order 8000.72, effective 28 June 2017, says that implementation of these principles is key to supporting the FAA Risk-Based Decision Making (RBDM) Strategic Initiative and “ensuring that the FAA meets the challenges of a rapidly evolving U.S. aerospace system.” The policy supports the RBDM initiative by leveraging the use of consistent, data-informed approaches to enable FAA “to make smarter, system-level, risk-based decision.”
Application
The Integrated Oversight Philosophy applies to the safety oversight programs of all FAA organizations that have regulatory oversight responsibilities. This policy embraces many interdependent principles including; RBDM, safety management systems (SMS), the FAA Compliance Philosophy (now called the Compliance Program), and voluntary safety reporting programs.
The Compliance Philosophy, established in FAA Order 8000.373, was the first step in the FAA’s culture shift to use safety management principles to proactively address emerging safety risks. The Integrated Oversight Philosophy references the Compliance Philosophy and requires that it be incorporated into all FAA oversight systems.
Related Articles

FAA Compliance Program (Philosophy)
ICAO Annex 19, Safety Management
Risk Based Decision Making Principles
Safety Management
Safety Management System

Further Reading

Federal Aviation Administration Compliance Program, Order 8000.373B, 22 April 2021.
FAA Integrated Oversight Philosophy, Order 8000.72, 28 June 2017.
Integrated Oversight Philosophy





Categories


Monitoring & Oversight












Feedback