Hindsight 21











  Hindsight 21









Article Information

Category:



General 








Content source:




 EUROCONTROL





 









Content control:




 SKYbrary





 
















Published in June 2015, HindSight 21 focused on Workload.
HindSight 21 Articles
Keynote

Keynote: by Frank Brenner.

Editorial

Shall we cut off the lizard's tail?: Editorial by Tzvetomir Blajev.
What is your maximum workload: by Professor Sidney Dekker.

The View from Above

Workload and the surprise factor: by Captain Ed Pooley.

Case Study

Case Study - Who stole my call sign?: by Bengt Collin.

Comment 1: by Richard "Sid" Lawrence.
Comment 2: by Captain Ed Pooley.
Comment 3: by Captain Pradeep Deshpande.



From the Briefing Room

The quantified self in a complex system: a systems perspective on mental workload: by Dr Steven Shorrock.
Are you a competent workload manager?: by Dragan Milanovski.
Your team is likely to be the key: by Adrian Bednarek.
Self-induced workload caused by poor communication: by Peter Hudec.
See who is talking!: by Tom Goossenaerts.
Workload: getting it to work: by Yoram Obbens and Rob Bezemer.
Faster is not always better: by Katarzyna Zmudzinska.
Know your limits: by Maciej Szczukowski.
How much workload is workload: by Michaela Schwarz and Fuat Rusitovic.
The chronology of workload: by Captain Shah Alam.
Where is my workload? Identifying hot spots: by Patricia Lopez and Nicolas Suarez.
Workload levels and their impact: by Dr Beth Lyall.
Can ATM learn from the experience of pilot workload measurement?: by Jean-Jacques Speyer.
Workload management in a 2-man flight deck: when automation increases the workload...: by Captain Dirk De Winter.
Using workload data to manage the deployment of change - defining the limits of safe workload: by Nic Turley and Brian James.
Sterile radio procedures: by Captain Wolfgang Starke.
Rhythm of the night: by Anthony Seychell.
A,B, C...it should be as easy as 1, 2, 3! - How to design a simple, safe and efficient taxiway designation system: by Gael Le Bris and Magali Kintzler.
A lack of workload resilience in a non-radar environment: by HindSight Editorial Staff.

Related SKYbrary Articles

Information Processing
Controller Workload
Pilot Workload

Register to Receive Your Copy of HindSight Magazine
Register here for a hardcopy of HindSight magazine to be sent to you by post every time a new edition is published
See all editions of HindSight magazine




Categories


General












Feedback