About SKYbrary










  About SKYbrary






What is SKYbrary
SKYbrary is an electronic repository of safety knowledge related to flight operations, air traffic management (ATM) and aviation safety in general. It is also a portal, a common entry point, that enables users to access the safety data made available on the websites of various aviation organisations - regulators, service providers, industry.
SKYbrary's Strategic Objective
SKYbrary's objective is to become a single point of reference for aviation safety knowledge by making universally available and accessible the safety knowledge accumulated by various aviation organisations, entities and initiatives. The SKYbrary knowledgebase is a dynamic enterprise and has taken several years to develop. To develop further, and maintain the accuracy and relevance of the knowledgebase, will require the support and active participation of all those interested in promoting best practice and knowledge in aviation safety.
SKYbrary Content Development Priorities
SKYbrary content development priorities have been focused on:

Who: Flight Operations and Air Traffic Management
Where: Globally
What: Operational Risks
Aviation sector: Commercial Air Transport

Content Management and Control
SKYbrary adopts the concept of Mediawiki products - anyone can comment, propose modification to an existing article, suggest a new topic or submit a draft article. However, there is an important difference that distinguishes SKYbrary from the wiki-like platforms. A robust content management and control process supported by appropriate user rights management ensures the needed quality, credibility and consistency of stored safety data.
More detailed information on content development and quality assurance procedures can be obtained from the dedicated article on Skybrary Content Management.
Communication with Users
To enable the sought user contribution to SKYbrary content improvement as per our Content management concept, we have provided the needed technical support for feedback submission. The generic feedback form is accessible through the "Contact us" feature at the bottom of any SKYbrary page. Feedback and suggestions about the content of a particular article should be provided by using the dedicated "Feedback" feature accesisble to the right sight of the article text. 
Important note. For information security reasons we use the domain skybrary.info  for communication with our user community. 
SKYbrary Value for Group Users
SKYbrary now has Corporate Subscriptions from airlines and ANSPs who want to use SKYbrary highlights to improve awareness of safety issues. For more information, take a look at the article "SKYbrary Corporate Subscription"
SKYbrary Partners
SKYbrary was initiated by EUROCONTROL in partnership with the following organisations:

International Civil Aviation Organisation (ICAO)
The Flight Safety Foundation
The UK Flight Safety Committee and
The European Strategic Safety Initiative (closed in 2016)

A growing percentage of SKYbrary content is under the control of the following organisations:

The Honourable Company of Air Pilots
Royal Meteorological Society (RMetS)

The inititive aims at developing a comprehensive source of aviation safety information and make it available to users worldwide.
Working with the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA), we have uploaded the outputs of the Commercial Aviation Safety Team (CAST) to provide a unique on-line resource of reference material for safety managers.
The SKYbrary Platform
SKYbrary is based on the Drupal open-source Content Management System.