Just Culture in Aviation



On this page you can find documentation regarding Just Culture in Aviation. From regulations to groups and practices - it's all here. Enjoy the reading!
Regulations
Regulations are documents of legal nature which describe the way institutions, corporate entities, governments, and/or prosecution offices across the world approach the balance between safety and justice.

European Union Regulations
ICAO Laws and Regulations
La instrucción judicial en supuestos de grandes catástrofes, y, en particular, de accidentes aéreos.
Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) 2015/1018 Laying down a list classifying occurrences in civil aviation to be mandatorily reported according to Regulation (EU) No 376/2014 of the European Parliament and of the Council 
Canadian Transportation Accident Investigation and Safety Board Act

Policies and Commitments
Policies are documents of non-legal nature which describes the way institutions, corporate entities, governments, and/or prosecution offices across the world approach the balance between safety and justice.

Justice and Safety, by Fred Bijlsma
CONFIDENTIAL HUMAN FACTORS INCIDENT REPORTING PROGRAMME (CHIRP)
EUROCONTROL Model Policy Criminal Investigation and Prosecution of Aviation and Railway Incidents and Accidents
Criminal Justice System in Italy
Criminal Justice System in Italy- Part 2
Just Culture Policy at ENAV, presentation by Volpini Salvestrini
The criminal liability of Air Traffic Controllers within the criminal negligence framework: time for a new approach? by Nicola Romano and Eliana Greco
Just Policy

Interest Groups
In Aviation, there are many active groups, societies and associations that show awareness of Just Culture. Below are few such groups, and their contribution to Just Culture.

ATCEUC - Air Traffic Controllers European Unions Coordination

Just Culture Toolbox


CANSO - Civil Air Naviation Services Organisation
ECA - European Cockpit Association

Just Culture – Who Decides Over ‘Just’
Just Culture Needs More Than Legislation
Just Culture & Systems Thinking Blog


IFATCA - International Federation of Air Traffic Controller Associations

Guidance Material – Just Culture


IFALPA International Federation of Air Line Pilots' Associations

Improving Accident and Incident Prevention Through Just Culture


Flight Safety Foundation

Just Culture in Accident Investigation
A Roadmap to Just Culture: Enhancing the Safety Environment
European Tour
Line Drawing
Just Policy
Continuous Improvement of Safety Culture – The Practice of Just Culture Decision Aid in China
Do You Have a Safety Culture?
Culture Shock
Keys to Safety
Attitude
Accident Investigations Still Important
Applying the Safety Roadmap in Africa
Mixed Culture


EUROCONTROL

EUROCONTROL supports national judiciaries in need of aviation experts with the first list of aviation prosecutor experts



For further information read the article about the contribution of aviation groups and entities to Just Culture.
Cases
Listed below you can find some aviation cases and the way they have been approached from a Just Culture perspective.

Commentary on the National High Court (Administrative Chamber) by Prof. Ph D Irene Nadal Gómez
Spanish Judgement on the National High Court (Administrative Chamber)
Israeli C130j-pilots jailed over display mishap
Just Culture within the airlines, a view from Juan Carlos Lozano on the sad case of Spanair in 2008
PLANTEAMIENTO DE LOS PROCESOS PENALES DERIVADOS DE GRANDES CATÁSTROFES. ESPECIAL REFERENCIA AL PROCEDIMIENTO DERIVADO DEL ACCIDENTE AÉREO OCURRIDO EN MADRID EL 20-8-08.
The Uberlingen Case: Legal Scenarios After Barcelona Court of Appeal Judgement
The case law of the Italian Supreme Court of Cassation in the field of aviation accidents Three cases presented by Pietro Antonio Sirena, President of the 4th Penal Section of the Italian Supreme Court
The case law of the Italian Supreme Court of Cassation in the field of aviation accidents Disaster of mount Sette Fratelli,presented by Pietro Antonio Sirena, President of the 4th Penal Section of the Italian Supreme Court
The Cagliari Accident : Legal Scenarios After Italian Supreme Court Judgement
B747/DC10, Japan Airlines, Suruga Bay Japan, 2001 (Legal Process - Air Traffic Controller)
HUNT, manoeuvring, vicinity Shoreham UK, 2015

Media

Shoreham: Accessing AAIB Evidence, Criminalisation And Just Culture
Just Culture: Who Are We Really Afraid Of?
How Aviation Improves Medical Safety
What Is A Just Culture?
Just Culture Video- Because We Are All Humans

Guidance
The articles below provide guidance on Just Culture for the aviation industry:

A thorough introductory article by Tony Licu and Roderick van Dam
Just Culture in Doubt by Tzvetomir Blajev
A just culture in aviation- Who is an expert by Francis Schubert
A new Just Culture algorithm by Sidney Dekker
A roadmap to Just Culture
Getting the benefit from just culture by Ian Weston
Just culture and American jurisprudence, a view from Tom Lintner and Tom Dunlap
Just culture in the real world:flight safety and the realities of society by Paul Reuter
Just culture versus criminalization-moving forward. An excellent view from a Portuguese lawyer, Jerónimo Coelho dos Santos
Why we need positive examples in our just culture, by Job Brüggen
The case law of the Italian Supreme Court of Cassation in the field of aviation accidents Aviation and the Judiciary-The role of Expert, by Pietro Antonio Sirena, President of the 4th Penal Section of the Italian Supreme Court
Criminalisation of air accidents and the creation of a Just Culture , by Mildred Trögeler
Just Culture - Who Decides Over 'Just'? by ECA
Guidance Material - Just Culture by IFATCA

Practices
Here below are some practical examples of Just Culture implementation by aviation entities:

Instruction with Regard to Criminal Investigation and Prosecution of Civil Aviation Occurrences by the Dutch Aviation Prosecutor Office
How Austrocontrol has implemented Just Culture
Alitalia example of implementation
Practical implementation at ENAIRE, a Spanish Air Navigation Service Provider
Just Culture: Reflections from our involvement in JC Prosecutors course to go forward
Just Culture vs. Criminal Law- Experiences with Accused Individuals
Safety Investigations and Just Culture at AENA
How a CAA can foster Just Culture between Aviation and Judiciary? CAA of the Republic of Poland, November 2014
Implement Just Culture in the Swiss legal system. A dream or a real opportunity? presentation by Robin Gurt
Just Culture from other continents – The Just Culture. Journey at Delta Air Lines and Aeromexico presentation by Trish DeMasi
Continuous Improvement of Safety Culture – The Practice of Just Culture Decision Aid in China Airlines
EUROCONTROL supports national judiciaries in need of aviation expertise with the first list of aviation prosecutor experts
Just Culture Achievements in Airlines Industry by Capt B. de Courville, AIRFRANCE

Further Reading

Regulation 376/2014 - Reporting, Analysis and Follow-Up of Occurrences in Civil Aviation
ESARR 2 - Advisory Material
Organisational Culture
Toolkit:Safety and Justice/Consequences 2
Toolkit:Safety and Justice/Consequences 5
Toolkit:Safety and Justice/Getting rid of
Toolkit:Safety and Justice/Rewarding 2






 













Just Culture Navigation



Main category page


Just Culture in Aviation


Just Culture in Healthcare


Just Culture in Maritime


Just Culture in Rail





Related resources




Human Error in Aviation and Legal Process
Safety and Justice Toolkit