Just Culture in Healthcare



On this page you can find documentation regarding Just Culture in Healthcare. From regulations to groups and practices - it's all here. Enjoy the reading!
Introduction

Need for Just Culture in Healthcare

Regulations
Regulations are documents of legal nature which describe the way institutions, corporate entities, governments, and/or prosecution offices across the world approach the balance between safety and justice.

Regulation EU 2017/745
Safety reporting in clinical investigations of medical devices

Policies
Policies are documents of non-legal nature which describe the way institutions, corporate entities, governments, and/or prosecution offices across the world approach the balance between safety and justice.
An example of a Just Culture Policy in Healthcare would be the following review into gross negligence manslaughter, written by Professor Williams.

Gross negligence manslaughter in healthcare. The report of a rapid policy review by Professor Sir Norman Williams

Groups
Below is a list of groups, societies and associations active in Healthcare that show awareness of Just Culture:

NHS - National Health Service

Insights from a Just Culture in practice Focus Group


CHFG - Clinical Human Factors Group

Cases
The cases below have been analysed from a Just Culture perspective:

Out of the pain must come healing Case presented by Suzette Woodward, NHS
Gross Negligence Manslaughter & Dr Bawa-Garba: Just Culture? case presented by Steven Shorrock
Joshua's Story

Media

A Senior Doctor At A Private Hospital In North-West London Has Been Jailed For Two-And-A-Half-Years For Killing A Patient
David Sellu Trial: 'Serious Errors' Caused Patient's Death
A Surgeon Who Was Jailed Over A Patient's Death At A Private Hospital In North-West London Has Won An Appeal Against His Conviction
A Surgeon Who Had His Manslaughter Conviction Quashed Says "Justice Has Not Been Done" For The Patient's Family
Meet The NHS Whistle-Blowers Who Exposed The Truth
Dear Sir Robert Francis, Your Report on NHS Whistleblowers Is Not Enough – We Need Action On How These Brave Professionals Can Be Helped
NHS Whistleblower:There's No Protection For Those Who Have Already Spoken Out
Whistleblowing Inquiry Lays Bare 'Alarming' Treatment Of Staff Who Speak Out
Who's Keeping A Lid On "Priceless" Whistleblower Information In Our Health System - And Why?
Call For More NHS Death Prosecutions
Dr. Peter Pisters And Fellow UHN Leaders Speak Candidly About Their Medical Errors
Video- Safety Investigation
Who Dares Confront Jeremy Hunt, NHS Bully-In-Chief?
Raj Mattu Case: Sacked Doctor Gets £1.22m In Damages
Dismissed NHS Whistleblower Who Exposed Safety Concerns Handed £1.22m
Manslaughter By Doctors
Doctor Errol Cornish Due In Court After Death During Caesarean Of West Malling Teacher Frances Cappuccini At Pembury Hospital
Breast Surgeon Pleads Not Guilty To Maliciously Wounding Patients
‘We Never Thought He Wouldn’t Come Home’: Why Did Our Son, Connor Sparrowhawk, die?
London Nurse Who Killed Patient By Giving Him Wrong Blood Type In Transfusion Is Convicted
Walsall Manor Hospital Sacks Four Staff After Death Of Man
Shrewsbury Maternity Trust Could Be Prosecuted for Corporate Manslaughter

Guidance
An interesting and valuable guide from the NHS provided below. The guide encourages managers to treat staff involved in a patient safety incident in a consistent, constructive and fair way.

NHS Just Culture Guide

Practices
The articles below provide afew practical examples of actions taken to enforce Just Culture in Healthcare:

Insights from a Just Culture in practice Focus Group
HMRI: Experiences of enforcing Health and Safety Law in Her Majesty's Railway Inspectorate by Patrick Talbot, Office of Rail and Road
The Measurement and Monitoring of Safety, by The Health Foundation Inspiring Improvement
Just and learning culture central to improving care by Mersey Care NHS Foundation Trust
Adopting a just culture guide. Helping to reduce variability in how managers respond to staff involved in a patient safety incident by Sussex Community NHS Foundation Trust
Scenarios to support training in using a just culture guide by NHS England






 













Just Culture Navigation



Main category page


Just Culture in Aviation


Just Culture in Healthcare


Just Culture in Maritime


Just Culture in Rail





Related resources




Human Error in Aviation and Legal Process
Safety and Justice Toolkit