Regulation 552/2004 - Interoperability of the European ATM Network











  Regulation 552/2004 - Interoperability of the European ATM Network









Article Information

Category:



Single European Sky 








Content source:




 SKYbrary





 









Content control:




 EUROCONTROL





 















Note: This Regulation was repealed by Regulation 2018/1139 with effect from 11 September 2018 and is no longer in force.
Regulation (EC) No 552/2004 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 10 March 2004 on the interoperability of the European Air Traffic Management network - text published in the Official Journal of the European Union
Objective
The aim of the Interoperability regulation is two-fold:

To achieve interoperability between the different systems, constituents and associated procedures in the European ATM network by establishing a harmonised system for certification of components and systems;
To ensure the introduction of new agreed and validated concepts of operations and technology in air traffic management.

Background
The Interoperability regulation forms part of the first package of legislation on air traffic management designed to create a Single European Sky (SES). This objective will make for improved safety, optimum use of European airspace, reduced air traffic delays and sustainable air transport growth.
The first Single Sky legilative package includes another three regulations laying down the framework for the creation of the single European sky (The Framework regulation), the provision of air navigation services (The Service provision regulation) and the organisation and use of the airspace (The Airspace regulation).
Key Terms Used in the Act
Interoperability. Functional, technical and operational properties which the systems and constituents of the European air traffic management network must have and the procedures for operation in order to ensure safe, efficient and seamless operation in the network.
Seamless operation. Operation of the European air traffic management network in such a way that, for users, it acts as a single entity.
Constituents. Tangible items, such as equipment, and intangible items, such as the software on which the interoperability of the European air traffic management network depends.
System. Ground and airborne constituents and the space equipment to support air navigation services during all phases of flight.
Summary
Essential Requirements
The European air traffic management (ATM) network, its systems and their constituents must meet essential requirements. These are of two kinds:

General requirements on: seamless operation, support for new concepts of operation, safety, civil/military coordination, environmental constraints, principles governing the logical architecture of systems and principles governing the construction of systems;
Specific requirements on: systems and procedures for airspace management, systems and procedures for air traffic flow management, systems and procedures for air traffic services, communications systems and procedures for ground-to-ground, air-to-ground and air-to-air communications, navigation procedures, surveillance systems and procedures, systems and procedures for aeronautical information services and for the use of meteorological information.

Implementing Rules for Interoperability
The implementing rules for interoperability must in particular:

Determine any specific requirements, in particular in terms of safety;
Describe, where appropriate, any specific requirements, in particular regarding the coordinated introduction of new concepts of operation;
Describe the specific conformity assessment procedures involving notified bodies to be used to assess the conformity or suitability for use of constituents, as well as for the verification of systems;
Specify the conditions of implementation including, where appropriate, the date by which all relevant stakeholders are required to comply with them.

Community Specifications
These specification may be:

European standards for systems or constituents, together with the relevant procedures, drawn up by the European standardisation bodies; or
Specifications drawn up by EUROCONTROL on matters of operational coordination between air navigation service providers.

EC Declaration of Conformity or Suitability for Use of Components
Constituents must be accompanied by an EU declaration of conformity or suitability for use. Before a system is put into service, the relevant air navigation service provider must establish an EC declaration of verification, confirming compliance, and must submit it to the National Supervisory Authority together with a technical file.
Safeguards
Where the National Supervisory Authority ascertains that a constituent or a system accompanied by an EC declaration of conformity/verification does not comply with the essential requirements for interoperability, it must restrict the application of the constituent or prohibit its use. The EU Member State concerned must immediately inform the European Commission of any such measures, indicating the reasons for it.
Where the European Commission establishes that the measures taken by the NSA are not justified, it will request the Member State concerned to ensure that they are withdrawn without delay.
Transitional Arrangements
Starting from 20 October 2005, the essential requirements will apply to the putting into service of systems and constituents of the European ATM network.
Compliance with the essential requirements will be required for all systems and constituents of the European ATM network currently in operation by 20 April 2011.
SES II Amendment to the Regulation
In order to ensure the progressive implementation of the ATM Master Plan and to avoid unnecessary administrative burden and overlapping conformity and verification procedures for ATM systems, the Interoperability regulation was amended by Regulation (EC) No 1070/2009 of 14 November 2009.
A number of changes have been introduced, some of which concern:

New article 6a - “Alternative verification of compliance”: Certificates issued in accordance with Regulation (EC) No 216/2008 establishing the European Aviation Safety Agency (EASA), as amended by Regulation 1108/2009 extending EASA remit to airports and ATM, should be accepted as alternative conformity or verification means, where they apply to constituents or systems.
Annex II: Requirements are introduced to a number of paragraphs in order to ensure that surveillance, communication and flight data processing systems are able to accommodate the progressive implementation of advanced, agreed and validated concepts of operation for all phases of flight, in particular as envisaged in the ATM Master Plan.

This Regulation was repealed with effect from 11 September 2018. However, certain articles and annexes continued to apply until the date of application of the relevant delegated acts covering the subject matter of the relevant provisions of this Regulation, and in any case not later than 12 September 2023.
Regulation (EC) No 552/2004 on the interoperability of the European Air Traffic Management network - consolidated text
Further Reading
European Commission

Air Transport Portal of the European Commission - Single European Sky





Categories


Single European Sky,
              SES Basic Regulations









Related Implementing Rules

Regulation 2017/386 - Requirements for the Performance and the Interoperability of Surveillance for the SES
Regulation 310/2015 amending Regulation No 29/2009 on data link services for the SES
Regulation 1029/2014 - Requirements on the Quality of Aeronautical Data and Aeronautical Information for the SES
Regulation 1028/2014 - Requirements for the Performance and the Interoperability of Surveillance for the SES
Regulation 441/2014 - Requirements on Data Link Services for the SES
Regulation 657/2013 - Requirements for Voice Channels Spacing for the SES
Regulation 428/2013 amending Regulation 1033/2006 as regards the ICAO provisions referred to in Article 3(1)
Regulation 1079/2012 - Requirements for Voice Channels Spacing for the SES
Regulation 1207/2011 - Requirements for the performance and the interoperability of surveillance for the SES
Regulation 1206/2011 - Requirements on Aircraft Identification for Surveillance of the SES
Regulation 73/2010 on the Quality of Aeronautical Data and Aeronautical Information
Regulation 262/2009 - Allocation and Use of Mode S Interrogator Codes
Regulation 30/2009 - Requirements for Automatic Systems for the Exchange of Flight Data Supporting Data Link Services
Regulation 29/2009 - Data link services for the Single European Sky
Regulation 633/2007 - Flight Message Transfer Protocol for Use by ATC Units
Regulation 1033/2006 - Procedures for Flight Plans in the Pre-Flight Phase
Regulation 1032/2006 - Exchange of Flight Data Between ATC Units













Feedback