ES2 2018











  ES2 2018









Article Information

Category:



General 








Content source:




 SKYbrary





 









Content control:




 SKYbrary





 















This year covered four working sessions on topics like Safety Culture, Fatigue Management, Human Factors in Digitalization and Just Culture & Judiciary System. A Just Culture Regional Workshop has been established, which included small workshops on Just Culture in different cities, called Regional Workshop. The materials from the first working session (whose theme was Safety Culture) are not available.
Go back to all editions of ES2 Meetings
 
Contents

1 Just Culture Regional Workshop
2 WS 02-18
3 WS 03-18
4 WS 04

Just Culture Regional Workshop
This edition of Just Culture regional workshop was held at Seville, between 10-11th of may. Below are attached the presentations:

Agenda
Cultura Justa Y Legislacion en la Navegacion AEREA Espanola ENAIRE
Cultura Justa Positiva Florentino Ruiz
Aspectos Procesales De La Investigacion De Siniestros Aeronauticos y Cultura Justa
Final Report Nr. 2037 by the Federal Aircraft Accident Board
La Comisión de Investigación del accidente de Dryden - Una Leccion de Historia

WS 02-18
The second working session was held in Brussels, at EUROCONTROL, between 28-29th of May. The theme was "Fatigue Management and Performance Delivery in ATM Rosters - Healthy and Efficient Rosters Can Go Hand-in-Hand" and during the event, available guidance, toolkits and surveys on different practices have been presented.

The presentations are listed below:

WS 02 Agenda
Overview of EU Requirements on ATCO Fatigue Management EASA
CANSO Fatigue Management Expert Group
Introduction of Requirements and Good Practice on Rostering
Total ATM Workshop:Shifting ATM
Shifting ATM- Description for Slides

WS 03-18
The third working session's theme was "Automation, Digitalisation and Cyber - When machine world meets the human world in Air Traffic Management". It took place at Scotland, between 27-28th of September, at university of Glasgow.
Below are attached the presentations from this workshop:

ES2 WS 03-18 Agenda
ADS-B and ADS-C in the Light of Digitalisation O.T.Pleter, C.Constantinescu
ATM Cyber Security Maturity Model HELIOS
Five Defensive Measures to Improve Cyber Security
Did We Learn From MH370? O.T.Pleter, C.Constantinescu

WS 04
The last working session on 2018 was held at Bucharest, on 24-25th of October and its theme was "Just culture across industries: Continuing to Learn from Each Other". This event represented a follow-up of Rome Conference from 2017.
Below, a list of the materials from this working session is shown:

WS 04 Agenda
Just Culture Essentials, Deliverables, Goals
Criminalisation of Errors under Various ICAO and EU Regulation IFATCA
Railway Level Crossings: A Personal Journey Tina Hughes
JC Repository and Knowledge Centre
Out of the Pain Must Come Healing Suzette Woodward
HMRI: Experiences of Enforcing Health and Safety Law P. Talbot
Positive Just Culture for Modern Times Florentino Ruiz
People Are Safety Rudy Pont

Go back to all editions of ES2 Meetings




Categories


General












Feedback