B752, Girona Spain, 1999











  B752, Girona Spain, 1999









Summary

On 14th September 1999, a Britannia Airways Boeing 757 crash landed and departed the runway after a continued unstabilised approach in bad weather to Girona airport, Spain.




Event Details

When

14/09/1999



Event Type


HF,
              RE,
              WX




Day/Night

Night



Flight Conditions

On Ground - Normal Visibility







Flight Details

Aircraft


 

BOEING 757-200









Operator

Britannia Airways



Type of Flight

Public Transport (Passenger)



Flight Origin




Cardiff Airport







Intended Destination




Girona-Costa Brava Airport







Take-off Commenced

Yes



Flight Airborne

Yes



Flight Completed

No



Phase of Flight

Landing








Location








Location - Airport

Airport

LEGE




General

Tag(s)


              Approach not stabilised,
              Non Precision Approach
          




HF

Tag(s)


              Ineffective Monitoring,
              Manual Handling,
              Procedural non compliance,
              Spatial Disorientation
          




RE

Tag(s)


              Overrun on Landing,
              Excessive Airspeed
          




WX

Tag(s)


              Precipitation-limited IFV,
              Strong Surface Winds,
              Lightning Damage
          




EPR

Tag(s)


              Emergency Evacuation,
              RFFS Procedures
          




CS

Tag(s)


              Evacuation on Cabin Crew initiative
          




Outcome

Damage or injury

Yes



Aircraft damage

Hull loss



Non-aircraft damage

Yes



Non-occupant Casualties

No



Occupant Injuries

Many occupants



Occupant Fatalities

Few occupants



Number of Occupant Fatalities

1



Off Airport Landing

Yes



Ditching

Yes




Causal Factor Group(s)

Group(s)

Aircraft Operation




Safety Recommendation(s)

Group(s)

Aircraft Operation
Aircraft Airworthiness
Air Traffic Management
Airport Management




Investigation Type

Type

Independent









Description
On 14th September 1999, a Britannia Airways Boeing 757 crash landed and departed the runway after a continued unstabilised approach in bad weather to Girona airport, Spain.
Synopsis
This is the synopsis from the official report into the incident published by the Spanish authorities (Comisión de Investigación de Accidentes e Incidentes de Aviación Civil (CIAIAC)).
"The aircraft made an approach and landing at Girona Airport, Spain, at night through heavy thunderstorms with rain. At a late stage of the approach the airfield lighting failed for a few seconds. The aircraft touched down hard simultaneously on the nose and mainwheels and bounced. A second harder touchdown on the nosewheel displaced the nose landing gear and its support structure. Resultant aircraft systems damage caused the loss of virtually all electrical power, interference with controls and uncommanded forward thrust increase."
"The aircraft ran off the side of the runway at high speed around 1,000 metres after the second touchdown. After crossing a number of obstacles, it landed heavily in a field outside the airfield boundary and came to rest after having travelled 1,900 metres from the second touchdown. The fuselage had been fractured in two places and there was considerable disruption to the cabin. There was no fire. Evacuation of all the occupants, initiated by the cabin crew, was was completed rapidly. Emergency services had difficulty in locating the aircraft in the adverse conditions and arrived on the scene after evacuation had been completed."
Contributory factors identified in the report included:

"Impairment of the runway visual environment as a result of darkness and torrential rain and the extinguishing of runway lights immediately before landing."
"Suppression of some automatic height callouts by the GPWS “SINK RATE” audio caution."
"The effect of shock or mental incapacitation on the Pilot Flying at the failure of the runway lights which may have inhibited him from making a decision to go-around."
"The absence of specific flight crew training in flight simulators to initiate a go-around when below landing height.
"Insufficient evaluation of the weather conditions, particularly the movement and severity of the storm affecting the destination airport."

Related Articles

Cumulonimbus (Cb)
Human Factors
Runway Excursion
Weather

Further Reading

For further information, see the full CIAIAC Incident Report