Critical Incident Stress Management in ATM











  Critical Incident Stress Management in ATM









Article Information

Category:



Organisation and Human Performance 








Content source:




 SKYbrary





 









Content control:




 SKYbrary





 















Introduction
Welcome to the Critical Incident Stress Management (CISM) page of SKYbrary!
Here you will find a brief overview on CISM and the implementation guidance materials provided on SKYbrary.
According to the EU Regulation No 2017/373 each ANSP in Europe should have established a CISM programme since January 2020.
Description
CISM is an interlocking and comprehensive peer-based programme to support colleagues after experiencing a critical incident. The aim is to manage the stress reactions caused by the critical incident and restore the individual's ability to work.
A critical event is not defined by the severity of the event, but always refers to the individual reactions of the person affected.
The internationally recognized definition of a critical incident is therefore:
A critical incident is any situation that causes a person to experience unusual strong stress reactions that the person perceives as disturbing or disabling.
The CISM Programme
Some European ANSPs have already gained valuable and also scientifically evaluated experience with the CISM programme, which has been incorporated into the newly published CISM Implementation Guidelines.
EUROCONTROL supports the implementation of a CISM programme with the following material:

CISM Implementation Guidelines – a comprehensive compendium
CISM Quick Reference Guide - an abridged version of the comprehensive one
Two video clips

The ‘CISM Implementation Guidelines’ is a comprehensive compendium that includes background of CISM, definitions, CISM intervention tools, basic structures, an implementation plan including the promotion of the programme; peer selection and CISM trainings, maintenance of the programme, useful checklists and samples.
The CISM Quick Reference Guide provides a quick overview and summarizes the most important steps in a condensed form.
The two video clips visualize:

the steps of the planning, promotion and implementation of a CISM programme
an example of how a CISM intervention is conducted, from the critical incident happening to the relief of the CISM call and finally to the return to work

All material available supports the implementation of a CISM programme in ATM at various levels and levels of detail and its sustainability. It can be used as a first overview, general guidance, for checklists, to promote the programme internally, to motivate potential peers, to find suitable trainers.
EUROCONTROL also offers support for the introduction of a CISM programme and for the referral to experienced ANSP's or suitable trainers for peer-trainings.
EUROCONTROL CISM Guidance

Critical Incident Stress Management: Implementation Guidelines. February 2021
Critical Incident Stress Management - Implementation Quick Guide, August 2020.

Video Clips on:









 Read more




Implementation of a CISM Programme


















 Read more




CISM Intervention









Related Articles

Teamwork in Air Traffic Control
Stress
Trust
Team Resource Management (TRM)
Improving Safety Culture in Air Traffic Control
Post Traumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD)

Further Reading
EUROCONTROL

Managing Stress in ATM, EUROCONTROL, March 2020
"Human Performance in Air Traffic Management Safety -A White Paper": EUROCONTROL/FAA Action Plan 15 Safety, September 2010.
Human Factors Module: Critical Incident Stress Management
CISM Case Studies

Others

International Critical Incident Stress Foundation website.





Categories


Organisation and Human Performance,
              HF-ATM












Feedback