A306, Paris CDG France, 1997











  A306, Paris CDG France, 1997









Summary

On 30 July 1997, an Airbus A300-600 being operated by Emirates Airline was departing on a scheduled passenger flight from Paris Charles de Gaulle in daylight when, as the aircraft was accelerating at 40 kts during the take off roll, it pitched up and its tail touched the ground violently. The crew abandoned the takeoff and returned to the parking area. The tail of the aircraft was damaged due to the impact with the runway when the plane pitched up.




Event Details

When

30/07/1997



Event Type


GND,
              HF,
              LOC




Day/Night

Day



Flight Conditions

On Ground - Normal Visibility







Flight Details

Aircraft


 

AIRBUS A-300-600









Operator

Emirates



Type of Flight

Public Transport (Passenger)



Flight Origin




Paris/Charles de Gaulle Airport







Intended Destination




Dubai International Airport







Take-off Commenced

Yes



Flight Airborne

No



Flight Completed

No



Phase of Flight

Take Off








Location








Location - Airport

Airport

LFPG




General

Tag(s)


              Inadequate Aircraft Operator Procedures
          




HF

Tag(s)


              Data use error,
              Flight Crew / Ground Crew Co-operation
          




GND

Tag(s)


              Passenger Aircraft Hold Loading
          




LOC

Tag(s)


              Aircraft Loading,
              Unintended transitory terrain contact
          




Outcome

Damage or injury

Yes



Aircraft damage

Minor



Non-aircraft damage

No



Non-occupant Casualties

No



Off Airport Landing

No



Ditching

No




Causal Factor Group(s)

Group(s)

Aircraft Operation




Safety Recommendation(s)

Group(s)

Aircraft Operation
Air Traffic Management




Investigation Type

Type

Independent









Description
On 30 July 1997, an Airbus A300-600 being operated by Emirates Airline was departing on a scheduled passenger flight from Paris Charles de Gaulle in daylight when, as the aircraft was accelerating at 40 kts during the take off roll, it pitched up and its tail touched the ground violently. The crew abandoned the takeoff and returned to the parking area. The tail of the aircraft was damaged due to the impact with the runway when the plane pitched up.
The Investigation
The French Bureau d'Enquêtes et d'Analyses (BEA) carried out the Accident Investigation. Their Final Report stated that “during the center of gravity calculations, made with the aid of a computer system, an incorrect value had been recorded. This had led to the aircraft being loaded and fuel being transferred so as to produce an actual center of gravity (C of G) well aft of the maximum limit authorized by the manufacturer”.
It was found that “the incident occurred due to the incorrect distribution of weight in the aircraft, causing a C of G a long way aft of the authorised limit. This distribution was the consequence of an error in entering the dry operating index at the beginning of the process of calculating the loadsheet, an error which was not subsequently detected.
The following four Safety Recommendations were made in the Report:

that during the initial training and at regular intervals, aircraft loading specialists be made aware of the importance of double-checking work performed at each stage.
that the GAETAN system (the computer system used to generate aircraft load and trim data) be updated with already existing or newly-developed options which allow computer operations to be carried out in sequence without any need to revert to manual calculations.
that computerized checks and tables of values be integrated into the system, to allow values considered abnormal to be detected when entered.
that controllers be made aware of the importance of passing on to crews, in their working language, any safety information transmitted to the controller in other languages.

Related Articles

Ground Operations
Ground Accident Prevention Program
Loading of Aircraft Holds

Further Reading

The full BEA France Investigation Report