Vehicle Driver Airside Safety Check List











  Vehicle Driver Airside Safety Check List









Article Information

Category:



Ground Operations 








Content source:




 SKYbrary





 









Content control:




 SKYbrary





 















Introduction
This Check List is designed as an aide-memoire to print off and keep if no equivalent document is available so that it can be reviewed periodically. It does not cover the conduct of effective vehicle airside radio communications with ATC which is dealt with separately in the article ATC Radio Use by Airside Vehicles
Prior Knowledge

Understand Aerodrome surface marking colour coding:

white for runway markings
yellow for taxiway markings including lead on/off lines to / from runway centrelines
markings on apron and ramp areas for various subordinate purposes may use colours other than yellow such as the commonly used white for roadways.




Be aware that the yellow line markings which define the division between taxiways and runways are always continuous on taxiway side and always broken on the runway side, and that when crossing from the continuous-lines-first direction a clearance is required, whereas when crossing from the broken-lines-first-direction clearance is not required.


Understand Aerodrome Signs (different types will be used in combination with each other)

‘you are here’ = black square signs
Mandatory instruction indicating restricted or prohibited access = white on a red background
Arrow and identifier prior to an intersection = which directions lead where - black on a yellow background usually with a ‘you are here’ sign
‘this way to’ = black on yellow background with an arrow`




Understand Aerodrome Lighting

Lit taxiway centrelines are green; green reflectors may be substituted
Lit taxiway edges use blue lights; blue reflectors may be substituted
Lit runway centrelines are white except near the end when they may change to red
Lit runway edges use white lights except near the end when they may change to yellow
A transverse row of red lights is a stop bar and must never be crossed




Make it your business to know if there is a Local Runway Safety Teams (LRST) at your aerodrome and if so what they have been doing.


Have any runway hotspots been identified on your aerodrome? If they have been, know where they are.


Be clear how the implementation of Low Visibility Procedures (LVP) affects the rules and procedures for airside vehicle driving.

Tactical Preparation

Be aware of the extent of the airside area which requires prior ATC clearance to proceed.


If there is more than one ATC designated for control of airside vehicle movements, including active runway crossings, ensure each of their control areas is understood so that frequency changes on expected or likely routes can be anticipated.


Note promulgated speed limits and any variation of these in different airside areas.


Check for any temporary restrictions and changes in the extent of the authorised movement area.


Review any issues which might arise because of reduced forward visibility or frozen surface deposits.


Have a current aerodrome chart which shows all taxiway and runway designations available in any vehicle being driven.


Consider expected routes in advance of a request for clearance to destination, taking particular note of runways which may be in use and in proximity to or likely to be encountered on these routes.


Re-check that you are familiar with the meaning of light signals which may be used by ATC if radio communications cannot be maintained.


Satisfy yourself, either before setting off or immediately as you do, that the vehicle being driven appears to be serviceable and that adequate forward visibility through the windscreen is available.

Maintaining Situational Awareness

It is essential that an airside vehicle driver remains positively aware of their location at all times.


If position uncertainty occurs, STOP at once and seek assistance from ATC.


Be especially careful at night or when Low Visibility Procedures (LVP) are in force.


Monitor ATC instructions to other vehicles and aircraft and mentally ‘position’ them relative to the actual and projected position of your vehicle.


Focus 100% on the driving and navigation task; if a colleague is in the driving compartment of the vehicle with you, involve them in tracking vehicle position - but do not devolve that responsibility to them.


If about to cross a runway having obtained an ATC clearance to do so, always carry out a visual inspection in both potential directions of the full length of the runway, and up the approach paths if visible, to ensure that no aircraft or other vehicles which might conflict with the received crossing clearance are visible.


Make full use of all aerodrome surface markings, signs and lights to aid situational awareness.

SKYclips











 Read more




Airside driving (SKYclip)














 Read more




Runway occupied medium term (SKYclip)










Further Reading

An Airside Driver's Guide to Runway Safety: Airservices Australia, 3rd edition, June 2012.
ACI Airside Safety Handbook, 4th edition, 2010
Network Manager Safety Study: The Impact of Airside Drivers on Runway Safety, EUROCONTROL, August 2015.
FAA Guide to Ground Vehicle Operations, FAA.





Categories


Ground Operations












Feedback