B738, en-route, southern Austria, 2010











  B738, en-route, southern Austria, 2010









Summary

On 9 May 2010, Boeing 737-800 being operated by Swedish operator Viking Airlines on a public transport charter flight from Sharm el Sheikh, Egypt to Manchester UK and which had earlier suffered a malfunction which affected the level of redundancy in the aircraft pressurisation system, experienced a failure of the single air conditioning pack in use when over southern Austria and an emergency descent and en route diversion to Vienna were made. There were no injuries to any of the 196 occupants.




Event Details

When

09/05/2010



Event Type


AW




Day/Night

Night



Flight Conditions

Not Recorded







Flight Details

Aircraft


 

BOEING 737-800









Operator

Viking Airlines



Type of Flight

Public Transport (Passenger)



Flight Origin




Sharm el-Sheikh International Airport







Intended Destination




Manchester International Airport







Actual Destination




Vienna International/Schwechat







Take-off Commenced

Yes



Flight Airborne

Yes



Flight Completed

Yes



Phase of Flight

Cruise








Location

Approx.

near Graz, Austria










General

Tag(s)


              Flight Crew Training
          




EPR

Tag(s)


              Emergency Descent,
              MAYDAY declaration
          




AW

System(s)


              Air Conditioning and Pressurisation,
              Fire Protection
          



Contributor(s)


              Component Fault in service
          




Outcome

Damage or injury

Yes



Aircraft damage

Minor



Non-aircraft damage

Yes



Non-occupant Casualties

No



Occupant Injuries

None



Occupant Fatalities

None



Off Airport Landing

Yes



Ditching

Yes




Causal Factor Group(s)

Group(s)

Aircraft Technical




Safety Recommendation(s)

Group(s)

None Made




Investigation Type

Type

Independent









Description
On 9 May 2010, Boeing 737-800 being operated by Swedish operator Viking Airlines on a public transport charter flight from Sharm el Sheikh, Egypt to Manchester UK and which had earlier suffered a malfunction which affected the level of redundancy in the aircraft pressurisation system, experienced a failure of the single air conditioning pack in use when over southern Austria and an emergency descent and en route diversion to Vienna were made. There were no injuries to any of the 196 occupants.
Investigation
An Investigation was carried out by the UK AAIB. It was established that the flight was a line training detail for the Captain occupying the left hand seat who had been designated as PF for the flight with the Line Training Captain occupying the co pilots seat.
It was eventually found that a left WING-BODY OVERHEAT annunciation which had occurred at 6500ft in the climb had been false. However, this was not known to the crew who had carried out the applicable Quick Reference Handbook (QRH) drill which required that the left hand air conditioning pack be shut down. Since there were no restrictions on continued flight with just a single pack, it was decided to continue the flight as planned.
Then, approximately 3.5 hours into the flight, in the cruise at FL360, the right air conditioning pack failed and cabin pressurisation was lost. The flight crew donned their oxygen masks, declared a MAYDAY and performed an emergency descent. An uneventful diversion to Vienna followed.
Following a ferry flight unpressurised to a UK maintenance base, a full engine engineering investigation was carried out during which various individually minor faults were found with the air conditioning and pressurisation system. It was concluded that the initial annunciation of an overheat had occurred because of a fault in the related firewire and that the subsequent pack failure which precipitated complete loss of pressurisation had resulted from the sudden failure of a flexible air hose for reasons which it was not possible to determine.
The Final Report of the Investigation was published on 9 September 2010 and may be seen at SKYbrary bookshelf: AAIB Bulletin: 9/2010 EW/C2010/05/01
No Safety Recommendations were made.
Further Reading

Aircraft Pressurisation Systems
Pressurisation Problems: Guidance for Controllers
Damage Tolerance
Defect Assessment