Stabilised Approach Awareness Toolkit for ATC











  Stabilised Approach Awareness Toolkit for ATC









Toolkit Navigation




Contribution of Unstabilised Approaches to Aircraft Accidents and Incidents
Stabilised Approach
Flight Crew Workload in Preparation for the Execution of an Approach
Unstabilised Approach: Delayed Descent Instructions
Unstabilised Approach: Inappropriate ATC Speed Instructions
Unstabilised Approach: Lack of or Wrong Information About Distance to Touchdown
Unstabilised Approach: Landing Distance and Final Speed Calculations
Unstabilised Approach: Late Runway or Approach Type Change
Unstabilised Approach: Vectoring into Short Final Distances
Unstabilised Approach: Vectoring Resulting in Intercepting the Glidepath from Above
Unstabilised Approach: Vectoring to Runways with Significant Tailwind Component













The toolkit is aimed at providing awareness to Air Traffic Controllers on the subject of Stabilised Approach. This aid was developed jointly by the Civil Air Navigation Services Organisation (CANSO), the Flight Safety Foundation, EUROCONTROL and Cotswold Airport.
Introduction
Annually approximately 30% of accidents in our industry are runway excursions. Many of these excursions are the result of unstable approaches. How can controllers play their part in achieving a stabilised approach?
Top 10 Stabilised Approach Considerations for Air Traffic Controllers
How much do you know about stabilised approaches? Is it enough? Take a look at this  list of considerations for controllers and find out.
Approach briefing examples











 Read more




Full Approach Briefing














 Read more




Short Approach Briefing










See the problems
View dramatised events illustrating real-life problems. Why did they happen? How could they be avoided?
These video clips are short demonstrations of some events leading to unstabilised approaches. Watch them with, or without the transcripts. You can also download the self-study notes to get even more benefit from them.











 Read more




Thank God it's Friday














 Read more




The late change










Resources
Statistics

Contribution of Unstabilised Approaches to Aircraft Accidents and Incidents
Definition of a stabilised approach

In the Cockpit

Flight Crew Workload in Preparation for the Execution of an Approach

ATC Considerations

Delayed Descent Instructions
Inappropriate ATC Speed Instructions
Lack of or Wrong Information About Distance to Touchdown
Landing Distance and Final Speed Calculations
Late Runway or Approach Type Change
Vectoring into Short Final Distances
Vectoring Resulting in Intercepting the Glidepath from Above
Vectoring to Runways with Significant Tailwind Component

Training material

Key points for trainers
EUROCONTROL Training Zone










Related resources
SKYclips









 Read more




Speedcontrol for final approach (SKYclip)













 Read more




Shortcuts and unstable approaches (SKYclip)













 Read more




Changing Runways (SKYclip)