DC93, en-route, Cincinnati OH USA, 1983











  DC93, en-route, Cincinnati OH USA, 1983









Summary

On 2 June 1983, a DC9 aircraft operated by Air Canada was destroyed following an in-flight fire which began in one of the aircraft s toilets. 23 passengers died in the accident.




Event Details

When

02/06/1983



Event Type


FIRE




Day/Night

Day



Flight Conditions

On Ground - Normal Visibility







Flight Details

Aircraft


 

DOUGLAS DC-9-30









Operator

Air Canada



Type of Flight

Public Transport (Passenger)



Flight Origin




Dallas-Fort Worth International Airport







Intended Destination




Toronto/Lester B. Pearson International Airport







Actual Destination




Cincinnati North Kentucky







Take-off Commenced

Yes



Flight Airborne

Yes



Flight Completed

No



Phase of Flight

Cruise








Location

Approx.

near Cincinnati, OH










General

Tag(s)


              Inadequate Airworthiness Procedures
          




FIRE

Tag(s)


              Fire-Electrical origin
          




HF

Tag(s)


              Flight / Cabin Crew Co-operation,
              Procedural non compliance
          




EPR

Tag(s)


              Emergency Descent,
              Emergency Evacuation,
              MAYDAY declaration,
              RFFS Procedures
          




CS

Tag(s)


              Toilet compartment fire,
              Cabin air contamination,
              Hand held extinguisher used
          




Outcome

Damage or injury

Yes



Aircraft damage

Hull loss



Non-aircraft damage

Yes



Non-occupant Casualties

No



Occupant Injuries

Many occupants



Occupant Fatalities

Many occupants



Off Airport Landing

Yes



Ditching

Yes




Causal Factor Group(s)

Group(s)

Aircraft Operation
Aircraft Technical




Safety Recommendation(s)

Group(s)

Aircraft Operation
Aircraft Airworthiness




Investigation Type

Type

Independent









Description
On 2 June 1983, a DC9-30 aircraft operated by Air Canada was destroyed following an in-flight fire which began in one of the aircraft’s toilets. 23 passengers died in the accident.
In-Flight Fire
Fire in the air is one of the most hazardous situations that a flight crew can be faced with. Without aggressive intervention by the flight crew, a fire on board an aircraft can lead to the catastrophic loss of that aircraft within a very short space of time. Once a fire has become established, it is unlikely that the crew will be able to extinguish it. For further information, see the main article Fire in the Air
Synopsis
This is the abstract from the official report into the accident published by the National Transportation Safety Board(NTSB) (USA):
“On June 2, 1983, Air Canada Flight 797, a McDonnell Douglas DC-9-32, of Canadian Registry C-FTLU, was a regularly scheduled international passenger flight from Dallas, Texas, to Montreal, Quebec, Canada, with an en route stop at Toronto, Ontario, Canada. The flight left Dallas with 5 crewmembers and 41 passengers on board. About 1903, eastern daylight time, while en route at flight level 330 (about 33,000 feet m.s.l.1, the cabin crew discovered a fire in the aft lavatory. After contacting air traffic control (ATC) and declaring an emergency, the crew made an emergency descent, and ATC vectored Flight 797 to the Greater Cincinnati International Airport, Covington, Kentucky. At 1920:09, eastern daylight time, Flight 797 landed on runway 27L at the Greater Cincinnati International Airport. As the pilot stopped the airplane, the airport fire department, which had been alerted by the tower of the fire on board the incoming plane, was in place and began firefighting operations. Also, as soon as the airplane stopped, the flight attendants and passengers opened the left and right forward doors, the left forward overwing exit, and the forward and aft right overwing exits. About 60 to 90 seconds after the exits were opened; a flash fire enveloped the airplane interior. While 18 passengers and 3 flight attendants exited through the forward doors and slides and the three overwing exits to evacuate the airplane, the captain and first officer exited through their respective cockpit sliding windows. However, 23 passengers were not able to get out of the plane and died in the fire. The airplane was destroyed”
Related Articles

In-Flight Fire: Guidance for Flight Crews

Further Reading

NTSB Aircraft Accident Report 86/02 - Air Canada Flight 797
see also FAA "Lessons Learned from Transport Airplane Accidents": Air Canada Flight 797, McDonnell Douglas DC-9-32 (S/N 47196), C-FTLU