Conflict Free Routing under Contingency











  Conflict Free Routing under Contingency









Article Information

Category:



ANS Contingency Planning







Content source:




 SKYbrary





 









Content control:




 SKYbrary





 















Definition
Conflict Free Routings provide a simplified route structure that helps to minimise the number of crossings on air traffic services (ATS) routes.
Objective
By reducing the number of potential crossings, conflict free route structures reduce the workload on remaining staff and systems under contingency operations.
Description
Conflict Free Routings provide a simplified route structure that helps to minimise the number of crossings on ATS routes. This should facilitate the establishment of a contingency Flight Level Allocation Scheme (cFLAS) which would provide for crossings that are vertically separated. In addition, procedures applicable to ATS units, pilot operating procedures and communication procedures could be developed. For example, the contingency plan should specify that aircraft are to maintain the assigned level and speed assigned by ‘upstream’ ATS units throughout the flight through the area affected by contingency except in cases of emergency and for flight safety reasons or as instructed/advised by the appropriate ATS unit. Furthermore, the plan should elaborate the Operational Concept, addressing which services (e.g. FIS and Alerting as the minimum), would be provided in the affected areas. Anticipated ATS sectorisation and associated capacity/service provision levels and acceptance of flight criteria (including emergencies and medical flights) should also be described. Meteorological conditions (hazardous weather) should also be monitored in the affected airspace and airspace users informed accordingly. The Central Flow Management Unit (CFMU) should be alerted to cFLAS plans both prior to and during any contingency.
Related Articles

CFMU in Contingency Operations
Contingency Strategies
Operational Concept for Contingency
Economic Assessment Of Contingency Plans

Further reading

For further information on Contingency Planning see the EUROCONTROL, Guidelines for Contingency Planning for Air Navigation Services (including Service Continuity). In particular, additional information on Conflict Free Routings and cFLAS can be obtained on page 116 of the Second Edition of the Guidelines.


See also the EUROCONTROL Reference Guide to EUROCONTROL Guidelines for Contingency Planning





Categories


ANS Contingency Planning












Feedback