I know better











  I know better









Toolkit Navigation


Safety and Justice






Navigator
Welcome
Theory













A rule was knowingly not applied
Okay, something happened in which somebody seemed to make an error.



 

 


 

 


 

 



Although the person knew about the rule, he or she decided that for some reason this was not applicable. It does not have to be a bad thing, however there are some facts to check.
"Situational violations" occur when there is a gap between what the rules or regulations require and what is available or possible - Lack of local resources and equipment or a lack of insight into local working conditions. This increases the pressure on people to break rules, to get the job done and achieve their goals.
However sometimes it is possible to get work done quicker and simpler, or just to get a kick, by not following the rules. This might be done to achieve perceived or real organizational goals (such as getting jobs done on time, or getting more income) or are a way to excel for the organization. Look what I am doing! It is much quicker this way!
Bonuses focussed on performance, or unclear communication of the organizations goals can contribute to this type of violation.
We believe that if this happens quite regularly, you would seriously have to look at your company's safety culture.



Examples



Deliberate wrong diagnosis


Nah... I will make it


Outbreak


Overloaded






Scarce group of radiologists

 
 
 












How to use the navigator
This is a general purpose navigator that has been inspired on a combination of theoretical models. Our purpose is to give you a quick method to get to a broad interpretation of observed behaviour. From there, you can go into more detail by delving into established safety culture models for further analysis and for appropriate remedies.
This "navigator" module will take you through a set of structured questions.
Select the most appropriate answer. You will get a chance to compare your outcome with examples from your own and possibly other industries, allowing you to 'calibrate' your thinking and opinion about the action during the safety event.
You can use the up arrow  to go back to the previous step in the decision tree.
You can use the  next arrow to see what follow-up and consequences for the person in question could apply.
The following diagram explains the complete structure of the decision flow chart (click on picture for full image in new window). Handy if you want to have the complete overview.