Intersecting Runways Operations











  Intersecting Runways Operations









Article Information

Category:



Runway Incursion 








Content source:




 SKYbrary





 









Content control:




 SKYbrary





 















Definition
Intersecting Runways: Two or more runways which cross or meet within their lengths.
Source: FAA JO7110.65 Air Traffic Control
Description
Many airports have intersecting runways, often as a consequence of expansion but also to provide a minimal crosswind option where wind direction is variable. Although the use of both runways simultaneously may serve to increase flight efficiency, shorter approach tracks and taxi routes for example, there are significant inherent risks associated with simultaneous operation of intersecting runways; strict procedures must be in place to prevent a runway incursion.
In terms of total throughput, using just one runway in mixed mode will in most cases provide a similar capacity to that which is possible with both runways operating, but with a substantially reduced potential for runway incursion incidents.
 

Accidents and Incidents


E190 / LJ60, Boston USA, 2023On 27 February 2023, an Embraer 190 was flaring for an imminent night touchdown on runway 04R at Boston in normal visibility when a Learjet 60 began takeoff from intersecting runway 09. As the Embraer descended through 30 feet AGL, the Learjet entered runway 04R, taking two seconds to cross it. The incursion had triggered an ATC alert and just after the crossing, the Embraer was instructed to go around and did so from around 10 feet AGL. The Investigation found that the Learjet crew correctly read back their line up and wait clearance but then took off without clearance.

AT76, Canberra Australia, 2019On 25 September 2019, an ATR 72-600 about to depart from Canberra at night but in good visibility failed to follow its clearance to line up and take off on runway 35 and instead began its takeoff on runway 30. ATC quickly noticed the error and instructed the aircraft to stop which was accomplished from a low speed. The Investigation concluded that the 1030 metre takeoff distance available on runway 30 was significantly less than that required and attributed the crew error to attempting an unduly rushed departure for potentially personal reasons in the presence of insufficiently robust company operating procedures.

B738, Perth Western Australia, 2010On 24 February 2010, a Garuda Boeing 737-800 misunderstood the runway exit instruction issued during their landing roll at Perth and turned onto an intersecting active runway. An expeditious exit from this runway followed and no actual conflict resulted. The phraseology used by air traffic control was open to incorrect interpretation by the flight crew and led to their premature turn off the landing runway despite a prior briefing on exit options.

DH8B / BN2P, Horn Island QLD Australia, 2016On 12 October 2016, a BN2 Islander and a Bombardier DHC8-200 were involved in a near miss after the DHC8 took off from a runway which intersected with the runway on which the BN2 was about to land. The BN2 broke off its approach just before touchdown when the DHC8 was observed accelerating towards the runway intersection on its take-off roll. The Investigation noted that the uncontrolled aerodrome involved relied on visual separation and use of a CTAF and found that although both aircraft were aware of each other, the DHC8 crew failed to fully utilise visual lookout.

E195 / A320, Brussels Belgium, 2016On 5 October 2016, an Embraer 195 took off at night without clearance as an Airbus A320 was about to touch down on an intersecting runway. The A320 responded promptly to the ATC go-around instruction and passed over the intersection after the E195 had accelerated through it during its take-off roll. The Investigation found that the E195 crew had correctly acknowledged a 'line up and wait' instruction but then commenced their take-off without stopping. Inadequate crew cross-checking procedures at the E195 operator and ATC use of intermediate runway access for intersecting runway take-offs were identified as contributory factors.


...further results


Related Articles

Parallel Runway Operation
Surface Movement Radar
Taxi-in Runway Incursions
Land and Hold Short Operations

Further Reading

European Action Plan for the Prevention of Runway Incursions (Edition 3.0). Appendix K: "Aerodrome Design Guidance for the Prevention of Runway Incursions"
Operational Safety Study: Sudden High Energy Runway Conflict (SHERC), March 2017





Categories


Runway Incursion,
              Airport Design and Infrastructure












Feedback