Pilot Handling Skills











  Pilot Handling Skills









Article Information

Category:



Human Behaviour 








Content source:




 SKYbrary





 









Content control:




 SKYbrary





 















Definitions
Manual Flying Skills are typically thought of as pure core flying skills, where manoeuvres are flown solely by reference to raw data obtained from the heading, airspeed, attitude, altitude and vertical speed instruments, and without the use of technology such as auto-throttles, auto-pilot, flight director or any other flight management system. This might extend as far as requiring manual trim inputs and navigation using basic systems.
Pilot Handling Skills will include all the above manual flying skills, but may also relate to combinations of manual flying, speed and directional control together with combinations of automatic speed and direction control and guidance. Such combinations may occur through pilot preference, operational or procedural requirements, or when some automated systems are no longer functioning.
Whereas commercial airline pilots may once have been assessed wholly on their manual flying (aircraft handling) skills, nowadays pilot assessment is predominantly based on Systems and Crew Management, where management of the automated systems and maintenance of situational awareness replace many of the traditional flying skills.
Application
Pilots require handling skills in a variety of situations including:

Visual approaches
Circling approaches
Instrument approaches (some precision and all non-precision)
Landing
Go-around
Missed Approach
Holding
Reaction to ACAS/TAWS
Recovery from unusual aircraft attitudes
Rejected take-offs
All phases of flight where aircraft flight control, management and navigation systems malfunctions dictate

Concerns
There are many arguments suggesting that commercial airline pilot handling (flying) skills have become eroded since the growth in popularity of fly-by-wire, glass-cockpit, fully automated, system-designed aircraft[1]. One could add to this the routine nature of many flight operations, the growth in controlled airspace and widespread availability of Instrument Landing Systems (ILS). Pilots flying with commercial airlines will typically only fly manually for the first and last few minutes of each flight. If a pilot logs 900 hours in a single year, fewer than 5 hours may involve manual flying. Also, more and more pilots flying today have never experienced an Industry where flying manually was, or is, the norm, unlike older pilots where these skills became “hard-wired”. This can further dilute the overall levels of pilot handling skills within an airline.
The majority of fatal, and non-fatal accidents, continue to occur during landing and go-around phases of flight[2], and loss of control (in-flight) continues to be the predominant category of fatal accidents[3]. Other areas of safety concern, for the Industry, include unstabilised approaches, runway excursions, heavy landings, tail-scrapes[4][5], level-busts, and engine and airframe exceedance of parameters. Each of these phases of flight and accident categories (above) would appear to involve pilot handling skills. Whilst it would be wrong to identify lack of manual flying skills as the cause to all of these, especially where loss of situational awareness, system malfunction, environmental factors and poor Crew Resource Management (CRM) were involved, it nonetheless does indicate that effectively applied pilot handling skills may help prevent accidents and reduce the consequences of errors.
Therefore, any arguments suggesting that commercial airline pilot handling (flying) skills have become eroded should be examined seriously.
Automation
The increased sophistication and use of automation has improved safety by reducing the workload on pilots, allowing them greater capacity and time to make forward judgements and decisions as well as “manage” better the aircraft systems and crew. Pilots learn to fly (i.e. their core manual flying skills) by correcting aircraft flight parameters based on their predictions to a projected forward goal – i.e. straight and level flight, or touchdown. However, with multiple levels of automation and flight modes it is very difficult for pilots to predict what the consequences of various failures will be in every given situation. Part of the necessary response to automation failures is to apply manual flying (handling) skills[6]. Increased reliance on automation by flight crews has created a risk that crewmembers may no longer have the skills required to react appropriately to either failures in automation[1]. Therefore, operators should ensure that training programmes include means and standards to be met regarding the interaction of human performance and limitations with changes to the normal operation of the automation[7].
Training and Practice
Basic flying training is predominantly focused on manual handling and becoming proficient in core flying skills. By the time a pilot completes professional training the emphasis is on system and crew management. During a pilot’s professional career as a commercial airline pilot he/she will be required to demonstrate regularly proficiency in certain handling skills, and under certain conditions, i.e. conducting a safe take-off with the loss of one engine, or, flying an ILS approach to go-around at decision height, also with one engine inoperative.
It is important for airlines to monitor the skill levels of pilot handling, perhaps through flight data monitoring programmes and line flying and simulator observations; then to use this feedback to adjust training syllabi. It is also important for airlines to integrate automation use and degradation into training to reflect operational conditions involving manual handling skills – automation not just a theoretical subject.
It may be necessary to provide pilots with additional flight simulator training specifically aimed at addressing pilot handling skills deficiencies.
Accidents & Incidents
Events in the SKYbrary database which include Manual Handling as a contributory factor:


B738 / SF50, vicinity Palma Spain, 2022On 28 May 2022, the crew of a Boeing 737-800 which had just taken off from Palma in good daylight visibility observed a light aircraft approaching from the right at high speed on a collision course and immediately initiated evasive action, achieving a minimum separation subsequently found to have been 116 feet vertically and 1,200 metres laterally and passing behind it. ATC radar showed that the other aircraft had not taken any action and it was found to have been operating on a VFR flight plan in controlled airspace without complying with the requirements for such access or listening out.

A320, Copenhagen Denmark, 2022On 8 April 2022, an Airbus A320 made a multiple bounce touchdown at Copenhagen followed by thrust reverser deployment. The Captain rejected the landing and began a go-around but as the left main gear had bounced and was not on the ground when thrust was set, the left engine reverser did not stow. Full aircraft control was briefly lost and a runway excursion narrowly avoided before a recovery to a single engine MAYDAY circuit and landing followed. Engine software design prevented thrust reverser stowage without weight on wheels which was why rejected landings after reverser deployment were prohibited.

A388, Singapore Changi Singapore, 2023On 2 March 2023, an Airbus A380-800 landing at Singapore in heavy rain drifted to the right of the runway centreline after the autopilot was disengaged before touching down close to the runway edge. The aircraft continued to drift right and the right main landing gear briefly left the runway and damaged several edge lights before regaining it. The handling pilot did not use the correct technique to regain the runway centreline before or after touchdown and go-around calls from the monitoring pilot shortly before and immediately after touchdown were respectively not understood/heard despite compliance with such calls being mandatory. 

CRJ2 / DA40, en-route, east northeast of Sion Switzerland, 2020On 18 December 2020, a Bombardier Challenger descending on an ILS approach into Sion in VMC within the Sion TMA was advised of unknown VFR traffic on a potentially conflicting track and working a different frequency. Minimum separation was 100 feet vertically and just over 1 nm laterally before the Challenger response to a TCAS RA increased vertical separation despite the other traffic also initially attempting visual separation by climbing. The Class ‘D’ airspace Sion TMA was inactive and therefore downgraded to Class ’E’. The Investigation concluded that procedures which prevented activation of the TMA at short notice were outdated.

CL60, London Stansted UK, 2022On 31 January 2022, a Bombardier Challenger 604 pilot lost control during the final stages of a London Stansted night crosswind landing. A bounced nose-gear-first touchdown was followed by a brief runway excursion onto grass before a return to the runway and a climb away. A diversion to London Gatwick followed without further event but subsequent inspection revealed structural and other damage sufficient to result in the aircraft being declared an economic hull loss. The Stansted touchdown was found to have occurred after a premature flare at idle thrust continued towards the stall and a momentary stick pusher activation occurred.


...further results


Related Articles

Automatic Flight - A Guide for Controllers
Flight Control Laws
Flying a Manual Go-around
Go-around Execution
Line Oriented Flight Training
Recovery from Unusual Aircraft Attitudes

Further Reading

Aircraft Loss of Control: Causal Factors and Mitigation Challenges, by S. R. Jacobson, NASA, 2010

References

^ a b Flight Safety Foundation Increased Reliance on Automation May Weaken Pilots’ Skills for Managing System Failures.
^ Boeing Statistical Summary of Commercial Jet Airplane Accidents 1959 – 2012
^ EASA Annual Safety Review 2012
^ Airbus Flight Operations Briefing Note: Preventing Tailstrike at Landing.
^ Airbus Flight Operations briefing Note: Preventing Tailstrike at Takeoff.
^ A332, en-route, Atlantic Ocean, 2009
^ EASA Automation Policy: Bridging Design and Training Principles. Version of 14 January 2013.





Categories


Human Behaviour,
              Loss of Control












Feedback