Contingency Process











  Contingency Process









Article Information

Category:



ANS Contingency Planning







Content source:




 SKYbrary





 









Content control:




 SKYbrary





 















Definition
A Contingency Process captures the key contingency planning considerations and activities in a framework comprising the following steps: Policy, Planning, Achievement, Execution and Assurance, and Promotion.
Objective
The contingency process aims to provide contingency planning practitioners with a coherent and systematic means to ensure that all aspects of contingency planning are considered during the development of contingency measures and plans.
Description
A typical contingency planning process could cover the following steps:


Policy: Sets the ANSP organisation’s contingency planning policy, operational concept for contingency and establishes the requirements around which the detailed contingency plans will be built
Plan: Plan demonstrates how the aims of the set of Requirements that have evolved from the Policy and Operational Concept will be achieved. It also outlines the strategies/actions and resources required. The products of this step are the contingency plan(s).
Achievement: Achievement verifies that the detailed means for translating the plans into reality are effectively in place. It covers testing, exercising, maintaining and reviewing the various contingency plans and raising awareness of contingency within ANSPs.
Execution and Assurance: This step corresponds to the Execution of the contingency plan. It includes also the monitoring and recording activities to be undertaken to enable the Promotion.
Promotion: Contingency Planning Promotion ensures communication of the contingency culture, dissemination of lessons learnt and enables the continuous improvement of the process.

The arrows forming the loop indicate that Assurance and Promotion follow the Execution of the Contingency Plan and they should ensure that the Contingency Plan(s) are reviewed and continually improved.
Related Articles

Consultation of Stakeholders
Operational Concept for Contingency

Further Reading

For further information on Contingency Planning see the EUROCONTROL, Guidelines for Contingency Planning for Air Navigation Services (including Service Continuity). In particular, further details are provided in Chapter 12.
See also the EUROCONTROL Reference Guide to EUROCONTROL Guidelines for Contingency Planning, especially Chapter 9.





Categories


ANS Contingency Planning












Feedback