SKYbrary Corporate Subscription










  SKYbrary Corporate Subscription






Raising Awareness of Safety Issues
A number of airlines are now organising corporate subscriptions to SKYbrary Highlights in order to further raise awareness of safety issues as part of their internal safety management and communication.
SKYbrary Highlights
Each Monday, the SKYbrary team send out an email to nearly 20,000 aviation professionals highlighting a topical safety issue. Highlights often remind our audience of seasonal safety hazards, or introduce them to new articles and areas of knowledge introduced to SKYbrary. In addition, we also send out extraordinary emails in the event of something happening which we think you will be interested to know more about. Examples include:

On 15 April 2010, we sent emails out with guidance for flight crews and controllers on Volcanic Ash as well as links to the latest airspace closure information from the EUROCONTROL CFMU and regional Volcanic Ash Advisory Centre.
Regular updates on the Bureau d'Enquêtes et d'Analyses (BEA) investigation into the A330 loss of control event which occurred over the Atlantic Ocean on 2 June 2009.

Benefits to Group/Corporate Subscribers
Tell us how we can help you improve corporate awareness of key safety issues relevant to your organisation. We can do this by introducing topics that are importance to you into our planned Highlight programme, or we can send a unique highlight just to your corporate group. In this way we can be an active part of your safety improvement programmes.
Corporate Subscriptions
The following organisations have a group subscription to SKYbrary:




All Air India pilots undergoing Threat & Error Management (TEM) training courses are registered onto SKYbrary. Air India is the oldest and largest airline in India.



Vistajet pilots are now receiving SKYbrary highlights. Vistajet is one of the world’s fastest growing private aviation companies, operating a fleet of Bombardier aircraft based across Europe, the Middle East, Asia, and West Africa.



Cockpit Italia members are now receiving SKYbrary highlights.



City University MSc Air Safety Management students and faculty staff are now receiving SKYbrary highlights. City University's MSC Air Safety Management, MSc Air Transport Management, and MSC Aircraft Maintenance Management modules are delivered in London, Bahrain, Dubai, Frankfurt, and Trinidad.



Zenith Aviation Limited are now receiving SKYbrary highlights.



Air Arabia Safety Sensitive Staff are now receiving SKYbrary highlights. Air Arabia is the Middle East and North Africa's first and largest Low Cost Carrier (LCC) operating to over 88 destinations spread across the Middle East, North Africa, Asia and Europe.



Air Contractors staff are now receiving SKYbrary highlights. Air Contractors is a Dublin based operator specialising in aviation services and fleet management, operating a variety of types in cargo and passenger roles.



The GOWAIR safety team staff are now receiving SKYbrary highlights. GOWAIR is a Madrid based airline.



If you would like to join our corporate subscription programme, contact [email protected].