Safety and Justice Online Toolkit











  Safety and Justice Online Toolkit









Article Information

Category:



Human Error in Aviation and Legal Process 








Content source:




 SKYbrary





 









Content control:




 SKYbrary





 















Description
A Just Culture is all about continuously giving the right response to situations and actions which can be judged from multiple viewpoints. There is not always an obviously “right” answer, but some responses are felt as “more just” than others.
Establishing a Just Culture has as much to do with supporting and acknowledging good actions, as it has to do with correcting bad actions. However, in today’s world one is easily forced to focus on the bad actions, forgetting to promote the good ones.
To support professionals “in the field” in their endeavour to create a Just Culture, the “Just Culture” Toolkit is designed to assist in the interpretation of human behaviour in professional environments. The development of this tool has been sponsored by SKYbrary within the framework of the Just Culture implementation and enhancement initiative run by EUROCONTROL Safety Team. This toolkit was developed by Job Brüggen, Safety manager at Air Traffic Control the Netherlands and Patrick Kools of GoGen - Beyond Rules.
The Safety and Justice Toolkit provides to the user a handy model for the classification of human behaviour without academic “abracadabra”. It serves as a general-purpose tool that is a balance between what is available from the university world and the practitioners out there in the field.
Not only will the Toolkit help classify the observed behaviour, but also assist in determining the correct “Just Culture” follow-up that matches the observed behaviour. The aim of the Toolkit is to enable organisations to react “justly” to different situations, and to help create an upward spiral leading to a Just Culture with optimal safety performance.
Obviously this is not a general-purpose model that should be the fixed and final guide to determine decisions. Common sense should be used and measures taken that fit the particular organisational culture.
Visit now the Safety and Justice Toolkit
Related Articles

Just Culture
Building a Just Culture
Human Error in Aviation and Legal Process

Further Reading




Categories


Human Error in Aviation and Legal Process,
              Just Culture,
              Guidance,
              Safety Culture,
              SM Methods and Tools












Feedback