Maintenance Error











  Maintenance Error









Article Information

Category:



Human Behaviour 








Content source:




 SKYbrary





 









Content control:




 SKYbrary





 















Definition
The unintended failure to carry out a maintenance task in accordance with the requirements of that task and/or not working in accordance with the principles of good maintenance practice.
Description
Aviation industry studies have found that the origin of as many as 20% of all in-flight engine shutdowns can be traced to maintenance error.
Typical maintenance errors include:

Electrical wiring discrepancies.
Loose objects left in airplane.
Incorrect installation of components.
Fitting of wrong parts.
Inadequate lubrication.
Access panels, fairings, or cowlings not secured.
Fuel or oil caps and fuel panels not secured.

For installation errors on engines, one specific study found the following types of error:

Borescope plug not refitted.
Engine-driven pump (EDP) drive shaft seal not fitted.
Engine attachment bolts incorrectly fitted.
Anti-ice valves locked out.
Fire bottle squibs not fitted.
Fuel pipe not secured.
Magnetic chip detectors (MCDs) not fitted.
Prop spinner fitment not completed.
Fuel control unit (FCU) controls not fitted.

The circumstances in which maintenance error occurs are the focus of human factors methodology.
Analysis of maintenance error data collected by a group of UK Maintenance Organisations found that when the type of error was classified, four categories accounted for 78% of the errors. These were Installation error - 39%, Inattention (damage) - 16%, Poor inspection standards - 12% and Approved data not followed - 11%.
The presentation of this data was accompanied by some solutions for both "people" and "process" for all the main types of error found.
Further Reading

ATSB Transport Safety Report - AR-2008-055: An Overview of Human Factors in Aviation Maintenance, Alan Hobbs Ph.D.
Airbus Maintenance Briefing Note Maintenance Error Management
Maintenance Briefing Notes: Maintenance Documentation by Airbus
Human Factors in Aircraft Maintenance, Colin G. Drury, State University of New York
Safety Behaviours: Human Factors Resource Guide for Engineers - Chapter 2: Error Management - CASA (Australia), 2013
Operator's Manual: Human Factors in Aviation Maintenance, FAA, 2014
Advisory Circular 120-115: Maintainer Fatigue Risk Management, FAA, 2016
Paper 2009/05: Aircraft Maintenance Incident Analysis, UK CAA, 2009
CAP 1367: Aircraft Maintenance Incident Analysis, UK CAA, 2016





Categories


Human Behaviour,
              HF-AM,
              Airworthiness












Feedback