Skybrary Content Management










  Skybrary Content Management






What is SKYbrary?
SKYbrary is an electronic repository of safety data related to ATM and aviation safety in general. It is also a portal, a common entry point that enables users to access the safety data made available on the websites of various aviation organisations - regulators, service providers, industry.
SKYbrary adopts the concept of Mediawiki products - anyone can comment, propose modification to an existing article, suggest a new topic or submit a draft article. However, there is an important difference that distinguishes SKYbrary from the wiki-like platforms. A robust content management and control process ensures the needed quality, reliability and consistency of stored safety data.
Generic Content Management Principles
Developing SKYbrary content and achieving the related targets requires well defined and systematic content management process. Content development needs are identified by: analysis of current operational safety risks, research and monitoring of SKYbrary user community needs, analysis of the current content and identification of missing knowledge elements or of existing knowledge elements, which need further enhancement. Content development plans (CDPs) have been established for all knowledge categories to ensure an efficient content development and update process, as well as an effective content development oversight. The CDPs are subject to periodic review and update to ensure currency and comprehensiveness of SKYbrary knowledgebase.
The task of content management is assigned to the SKYbrary Content Manager.
Content Quality Assurance
The basic content management principle is that article content is developed using information derived from qualified sources (e.g. International Civil Aviation Organisation (ICAO), FSF, European Aviation Safety Agency (EASA), Federal Aviation Administration (FAA), EUROCONTROL documents and publications). However, a number of knowledge items (articles) promulgate best practices applied across various regions and organisations. The article content source and content control responsibility are indicated in the “Article Information” meta-data box, associated with each article and displayed in the upper right corner of the article page.
The integrity, consistency and correctness of article content are ensured through the formal compliance with the established:

Article authorship, review and approval process and procedures
Dedicated user rights management procedures and system support
Procedure for peer review by SKYbrary Partners
Procedure for integration of material produced by recognised organisations without change.

The task of content quality assurance is assigned to the SKYbrary Content Manager.
Article Creation and Upload
Anyone can propose to create a new article or draft it himself/herself. Proposals for new articles, modifications to existing ones or new draft articles should be submitted to the Editor or Content manager through the “Contact us” feature accessible at the bottom of the Skybrary pages.
The Editor only is entitled to integrate a draft article into the relevant SKYbrary knowledge category following completion of article editorial and validation process.
Article Review Cycle
All SKYbrary knowledge items, including articles are subject to review in order to ensure the required content quality, reliability, scope and relevance. The review process can be generally described as:

Random. Such reviews are carried out by the users and by the SKYbrary development team ad-hoc or on particular occasions. The recommendations and suggestions passed by the users are given due consideration.
Periodic. The review is carried out by the members of the SKYbrary development team (Editor, Content manager, Moderator, Authors) in line with the established review procedure and schedule.