Industry Day - November 2018











  Industry Day - November 2018









Article Information

Category:



SM ICG Safety Management Products 








Content source:




 SM ICG





 









Content control:




 SM ICG





 















SM ICG Holds Bi-annual Meeting at EASA
The Safety Management International Collaboration Group (SM ICG) held its bi-annual meeting at the European Aviation Safety Agency (EASA), Cologne during the week of 12 November 2018. Initially created by the United States Federal Aviation Administration (FAA), Transport Canada Civil Aviation (TCCA) and EASA, the SM ICG was established in 2009 to promote a common understanding of safety management principles and requirements, facilitating their application across the international aviation community. Since its formation, the group has published 25 products and several have been translated into French, German, Japanese, Portuguese, and Spanish. In recent years, the SM ICG has increased its outreach to the greater international aviation community. Nowadays SM ICG is a group of 18 worldwide aviation regulatory bodies.
Seventeen member state aviation authorities met for a full day (plenary session). This was followed by an Industry Day, where 11 Safety Management System (SMS)-related presentations were delivered. Three project team meeting days dedicated to the development of SMS and State Safety Program (SSP) material completed the week, as follows:

Performance-based / risk-based oversight;
Sector safety risk profiling at the State Level;
Enhancement to the SMS evaluation tool.

The Steering Committee launched two new projects:

Effective oversight following the introduction of SMS;
Management of changes at State level.

The Industry Day involved 42 representatives from 17 Member State aviation authorities and 55 industry representatives from Europe. This was a unique opportunity for aviation service providers to hear directly from authorities that are working together on safety management-related items and for those authorities to receive feedback on SM ICG products. Almost 80 percent of the participants utilize SM ICG products. The SM ICG Chair, Claudio Trevisan from EASA, effectively managed the successful event. His key message was “keep SMS simple.” The Industry Day speaker biographies and presentations are available for download at the bottom of this page. Upcoming publications will include:

Safety Culture Self-Assessment Tool for Regulators;
Revised SSP Assessment Tool;
Hazard Taxonomy Examples;
SM ICG Position Paper on SMS and QMS.

To receive new product publication announcements, contact [email protected] to be added to the mailing list.
The next bi-annual meeting will take place in Brisbane, Australia during the week of 6th May 2019. The Industry Day theme will be Safety Management Beyond 2020, Challenges and Opportunities.
Industry Presenter Abstracts & Biographies
Tendai MUTAMBIRWA
Head of Compliance Monitoring, easyJet Airline Company Limited and Head of Safety, Security & Compliance, easyJet Europe Airline GmbH Simple SMS in a Complex Operational Arrangement – Marginal Gains Abstract:  This presentation shares some practical ways to progress an SMS through aggregating marginal gains by applying the continuous improvement requirements. The experiences shared also support any organisation implementing SMS by way of, providing a good structured approach to understanding the maturity levels of each element within the SMS and establishing constructive development plans to further improve the elements that have been implemented. Progressive areas in aviation safety like, leading indicators and Safety II are explained through simple examples that are meaningful and fundamental to complex and non-complex organisations alike. This presentation aims to keep it simple, but emphasise that simple things need to be done well to be effective. Bio:  Tendai is a graduate in Aerospace Engineering and has an association with easyJet for over 14 years, also having worked in various roles in the airline. Tendai is one of the principal architects of the industry leading easyJet SMS, where he has applied his skills as a safety practitioner establishing an integrated SMS across all the easyJet EASA certificated organisations (Part-Air Ops; Part-FCL; Part-M; Part-145; Part-21J) and leveraged his safety leadership abilities to seamlessly support the establishment of the easyJet European AOC based in Vienna, Austria. He has also held pivotal safety roles in The Boeing Company and SR Technics.
Juan Ramón MATEOS
Maintenance Safety Officer, Iberia SMS Implementation at Iberia Maintenance – Success Keys and Lessons Learnt (Part-145) Abstract:  Since 2010 that the SMS was implemented at IBE Maintenance, people were encouraged through training sessions and safety campaigns to report any hazard they could detect on their daily work. Unfortunately, reporting culture did not work in the early years mainly because staff felt they were not supported by the intermediate level and top management, giving priority to productivity instead of safety and questioning application of the just culture model. In 2016, a new management team came to IBE and put safety as the main pillar for the whole maintenance organization. All management levels were urged to create a safety culture within their teams starting with the safety reporting. This new confidence environment enabled rapidly people to be engaged and to report more and more until an increase of 1800% was reached during the first two years. But we were victims of our success: How to deal now with so many reports? The presentation tries to explain the tools used to administrate SMS in a smart way, by clustering the reports, and the lessons learnt and some of the challenges either being, or still to be, addressed. Bio:  Juan Ramon received a degree in Aeronautical Engineering in 1997. He accumulated 20 years of experience in commercial aviation within IBERIA Airlines, always related to the maintenance environment. From 1999 to 2009 he worked as a Quality Manager in the IBERIA Maintenance Training Centre. In this period, he actively participated in the EAMTC, to harmonise type-training requirements with other EAMTC members, and sharing experiences and common points of view with the Part 66/147 regulatory authorities. In 2008 he worked to impulse the IBE training centre to the highest industry standards until obtaining the recognition of Airbus as part of its training network. By the end of 2009, he joined the Maintenance Safety department as a Safety Officer. In this time, he worked to change the Safety Culture of the maintenance organization to evolve from a reactive position, just analysing the incidents having any actual operational impact, to dive into the maintenance daily issues with a proactive hazard identification attitude. He focused on the application of Just Culture to deal with maintenance errors in a fair and open-minded manner. His dream: to integrate all the sources of hazard identification within the maintenance organization in a predictive approach.
Andreas BETZOLL
Director Quality & Safety Management, Pilatus Aircraft Ltd Switzerland SMS – It Is Simple, Keep It That Way! Abstract:  The Safety Management System of Pilatus Aircraft Ltd is in operation since 2011. Although SMS is currently only a requirement for the Maintenance Organization (national requirement) and the Approved Trainings Organization, Pilatus decided to implement one company-wide SMS across all six approved organizations of Pilatus, the flight operation and occupational health and safety. During the implementation of the SMS, existing processes such as the Continued Airworthiness Process were used and the practical and easy use of the system was in focus. The presentation provides a short summary of the SMS implementation, explains the Pilatus SMS and summaries the experience so far. The presentation also highlights a few points in regards to the oversight of organization with multiple approvals. Bio:  After a few years as aircraft mechanic and after completion of his aerospace degree in Aachen (Germany), Andreas Betzoll joined Pilatus Aircraft Ltd, Switzerland in 1997. Starting as a Reliability & Maintainability Engineer in the Pilatus Design Organisation, he became Director Safety, R&M in 2002. As such, he was responsible for all safety and R&M aspects in several aircraft certification projects. In parallel, he worked as an Air Safety Investigator, representing Pilatus in several accident investigations. In 2010 he started with the implementation of SMS which became operational one year later under his management. In 2016 Pilatus decided to start with an Integrated Management System, combining the SMS and the Quality Management System, under the responsibility of Andreas in his new role as Director Quality & Safety Management.
Owen DAVIES
Principal Specialist, Directorate of Safety, NATS The CANSO Standard of Excellence in SMS – Driving Continuous Safety Improvement Abstract:  The CANSO Standard of Excellence in Safety Management Systems (SoE in SMS) builds on the experiences of CANSO Members to provide a framework to help air navigation service providers (ANSPs) continually improve their efforts to manage safety. Aligned with the ICAO’s Annex on Safety Management (Annex 19), it is regularly updated to address feedback received from ANSPs and other industry bodies and incorporate the latest developments in safety management thinking and practice. The SoE in SMS details a pathway that ANSPs can follow to build an SMS that is compatible with Annex 19 requirements and gives ANSPs the flexibility to build SMSs that fit their size and operational complexity. This presentation describes key elements of the tool, how it continues to evolve and support members and how it is used in practice. Bio:  Owen Davies joined NATS in 1991 as an operational research analyst, working on the optimisation of the first Short Term Conflict Alert (STCA) systems for Manchester and London Terminal Areas. Following roles within the cost benefit analysis and strategy domains, he headed NATS’ Airport Capacity team in the delivery of runway capacity assessments for the UKs major airports from 2001 to 2005. He was then contracted to Eurocontrol in Brussels, leading airport capacity and delay analysis projects at some of Europe’s busiest airport. On return to NATS in 2010, Owen led the TMA Concept team within the SESAR Programme before returning to Brussels in 2014 to run NATS Brussels Office, working closely with the EU institutions and aviation organisations & agencies as well as CANSO. Owen joined NATS Directorate of Safety in August 2018, focussing initially on Regulatory Compliance. Throughout his 27 year NATS career, safety assurance has always been a key driver and has brought a wealth of practical and technical experience to NATS Safety team.
Huw ROSS
Principal Consultant, HELIOS (Egis Aviation), UK Using PDCA Lifecycle to Keep Your SMS Simple Abstract:  Organizations have a choice when they define the model and the language of their Safety Management System. It is an important decision! Designing an approach that connects with both your leadership and your employees will help set a foundation that ensures safety management is a conversation that is natural and requires little effort. This presentation showcases the use of a bespoke model based on the Plan Do Check Act ‘Deming’ continuous improvement lifecycle to achieve this. It introduces a set of safety objectives that detail the outcomes of PDCA based on ICAO Annex 19, the CANSO Standard of Excellence in SMS and importantly the applied knowledge of SMS experts. These objectives drive the application of the SMS on a day-to-day basis. The presentation discusses each segment of the lifecycle and how it drives safety performance improvement. The pre-requisite is an understanding of safety risk that drives collaboration and the presenter offers a potential solution. Bio:  Huw is a Principal Consultant within Helios, the consulting organisation of the Egis Aviation Business Unit. Huw is also a member of the CANSO Global Safety Standing Committee. Huw has spent his career preventing and minimising the impact of accidents on people. His life as a safety risk specialist started 20 years ago investigating vehicle collisions and industrial health and safety incidents. More recently he has spent 12 years working directly for a leading ANSP in Europe. As an ATM Safety Management Specialist his focus was to maximise the effectiveness of ATM by managing safety risks linked to safe aircraft operation. Huw provides experience in designing, implementing and applying safety management systems within various industries and importantly is passionate about sharing this knowledge to drive improvement in the aviation industry.
Steve HARRISS
Principal Consultant, Baines Simmons Management of Safety versus SMS Abstract:  Meeting your compliance obligations across all functions of the organisation whilst ensuring operational effectiveness is a constant challenge, with compliance traditionally viewed as a necessary burden rather than an asset that can deliver performance benefits. The move towards performance-based regulation has driven a sharper focus in organisations on how to address integrating business and compliance activities more effectively such that they enhance performance and provide increased resilience. Discover how to make your SMS more holistic, proactive and compliance focused in order to assure yourselves and your stakeholders that you underpin your safety performance whilst considering the whole management system approach. Bio:  Steve has over three decades of experience across a broad spectrum of Aviation disciplines. Having initially served in the Royal Navy as an aircraft Engineer and Military air accident investigator, Steve was Principal Consultant Safety programmes at Baines Simmons for over 6 years between 2008-2015. More recently Steve was Head of Safety Eastern hemisphere for Bristow Group with responsibility for 8 AOCs including UK SAR, Oil and Gas operations, Eastern Airways and AirNorth in Australia. Steve has worked with some of Europe’s largest Airlines, MRO and OEMs in order to assess, build and enhance Safety and operational performance.
Robert O’REGAN
BEng (Hons), CEng, MiM, HDip RSEI, MIEI – Corporate Airside Safety Compliance Manager, daa (Dublin & Cork Airports) Safety Management Implementation in Dublin and Cork Airports (daa) Abstract:  daa operates Dublin and Cork airports in Ireland and has significant overseas businesses through its ARI and daa International subsidiaries in addition to the Dublin Airport Central development at Dublin Airport. Dublin and Cork airports are the two largest airports in the Republic of Ireland, welcoming a combined 31.9 million passengers in 2017. Pursuant to Regulations 216/2008 (as amended) and 139/2014, in December 2017, both Aerodromes were successfully certified by the CA. This presentation provides an overview of the Safety Management Structures in place, key principles applied to ensure successful implementation, and key focus areas for continuous improvement in 2018 & 2019. Bio:  Robert O’Regan is a Chartered Engineer who began his career in the safety critical sector of the railway industry, firstly as a project engineer on a 7.6km twin bore heavy rail design project. Robert joined the Commission for Railway Regulation (CRR) in 2012, and as a Warranted Inspector was tasked with leading supervision activities such as process and system auditing, inspections, post incident inspections and many more. Robert was also charged with the responsibility for projects within the conformity assessment function of the CRR, such as Designated Body – Infrastructure and Authorisation for Placing in Service and was tasked with the development of the Regulatory Body arm of the CRR. In 2017 Robert joined daa as the Health, Safety, Sustainability and Environmental (HSSE) Systems Manager, changing role to the Corporate Airside Safety Compliance Manager in January 2018. In his current role Robert is tasked with leading the airside safety compliance activities covering both airports, which includes leading the SMS review process and driving change as necessary.
Dorte NYGAARD
Safety & Crisis Manager, Copenhagen Airports A/S, Denmark SMS for Airports – The Copenhagen Approach Abstract:  How to transfer theory and the written words of your SMS into implemented practices? This presentation demonstrates with practical examples how SMS has been made simple at Copenhagen Airports. The presentation sets off from a safety occurrence taking place, and takes you through the steps of occurrence reporting, investigation, safety assurance and safety promotion. The second part of the presentation reflects how CPH strives to improve safety when targeting the administrative managers and specialists of the company. How allocated responsibilities are acknowledged, measured and continuously improved. Bio:  Stud. MSc Air Safety Management – City, University of London Member of the ACI World Safety and Technical Standing Committee (STSC) Member of the EASA Collaborative Analysis Group (CAG) on Aerodromes and Ground Handling Member and founding partner of the European Safety Benchmark Group (SBG), currently counting 18 airports Dorte is an aviation professional with 19 years of experience from numerous positions within the areas of ground handling and aerodrome management at Copenhagen Airport. Since October 2017 the Safety & Crisis Manager of Copenhagen and Roskilde Airports, and was prior to that head of Airside Compliance and Supervision for a period of 4 ½ years.
Thomas LEOFF
International Association of Aviation Personnel Schools (IAAPS) Chairman and Manager Training Standards Lufthansa Aviation Training GmbH (LAT) SMS within Authorised Training Organisations (ATO) Abstract:  The presentation will focus on the SMS application within a complex ATO and take the combination of type rating training and an operator conversion course as an example. The processes developed by the LAT ATO, which reflect the applicable legal requirements, will be presented. Identified legal uncertainties and ideas for the further development of performance-based regulation for this interface will conclude the presentation. Bio:  Thomas Leoff is the chair of the International Association of Aviation personnel schools (IAAPS) and Manager Training Standards within Lufthansa Aviation Training. He has been in the aviation training business since 1991 and is a recognized expert in day-to-day practical training management as well as in the field of developing the future training environment. Since 2014, he is a Fellow of the Royal Aeronautical Society. He is a member of the EASA´s Stakeholder Advisory Board (SAB) and in this function an industry observer in the EASA Management Board´s PAR group (Programming and Resources Advisory Group). He is the chair of EASA´s Flight Standards Technical Committee (FS.TEC) and a member of the Aircrew Training Policy Group (ATPG), an FS.TEC sub-group. He was the chair of EASA´s RMT.0595 “Technical review of theoretical knowledge syllabi, learning objectives, and examination procedures for the Air Transport Pilot Licence (ATPL), Multi-crew Pilot Licence (MPL), Commercial Pilot Licence (CPL), and Instrument Rating (IR)”.
Daniel BOLOT and Daniel VACHER
French Aeronautical Federation (FFA) SMS Implementation for General Aviation – FFA (French Aeronautical Federation) Abstract:  The French Aeronautical Federation (FFA) helps the 600 aero clubs for the development of their activities under the best possible conditions. An important action consists in helping the clubs to put in place a safety policy. Therefore, the FFA elaborates and proposes to the aero clubs strategies and means to put in action this policy. These actions permit the creation of tools to identify dangers and risks. Equally, numerous regional meetings enable safety representatives to carry out the actions of the FFA. Daniel Bolot Bio:  Daniel Bolot is member of the management committee of the French Aeronautical Federation (FFA). He manages the aero clubs and development committee of the FFA. He organizes numerous training courses related to flight safety. He makes contributions to many safety document. Daniel is a FI (Flight Instructor), FE (Flight Examiner) and SFE (Senior Flight Examiner). He works in an aero club on voluntary basis. Daniel Vacher Bio:  Daniel Vacher is a member of the management committee of the French Aeronautical Federation (FFA). He manages the national safety committee. He is CPL (Commercial Pilot Licence), FI (Flight Instructor) and FE (Flight Examiner). He also works in an aero club on a voluntary basis.
Gilles FONTAINE and Jean-Pierre ARNAUD
ASD and EASA Cooperation “Industry – Regulator” to Foster the SMS Implementation Abstract:  Five major Aerospace Industries associations (AIA, ADS, AIAB, AIAC and GAMA) have developed an international Industry Standard to support the understanding and implementation of SMS in Part-21 and Part-145 for the design, production and maintenance providers. This document also provides some guidance and best practices. The regulators plan to recognize that Industry standard as a Mean of Compliance for voluntary and mandatory SMS implementation. This mechanism could be repeated in other domains to foster SMS implementation and reach out small organisations such as aero clubs, training organisations etc. The presentation also proposes a few websites where SMS guidance, best practices and practical examples are collected and available free of charge. Gilles Fontaine Bio:  Gilles Fontaine, 25 years of experience in aircraft certification, is currently head of DOA Expertise within Airbus Commercial Aircraft to: ensure compliance of Airbus organisation/processes with European DOA regulation; represent Airbus in European DOA rulemaking activities with EASA and in European DOA standardisation activities with ASD (Vice chair of ASD DOA Working Group); and contribute to International airworthiness cooperation projects between EU and foreign countries. Within the frame of SMS topic, Gilles is chairing the SMS International Standard drafting group set up by The AeroSpace and Defense Industries Association of Europe (ASD), Aerospace Industries Association of United States of America (AIA), Aerospace Industries Association of Brazil (AIAB), the Aerospace Industries Association of Canada (AIAC) and the General Aviation Manufacturers Association (GAMA). Graduated from French Military Engineering School, Gilles was previously, within the French Civil Aviation Authority, (DGAC-F), responsible for Design Organisation Approvals granted to French organisations (TC/STC holders). Jean-Pierre Arnaud Bio:  Jean-Pierre Arnaud is a graduated engineer with 30 years of international experience in aviation. He holds a professional pilot license. He spent 13 years with the French aviation authorities as a manager for airworthiness, then he joined the European Aviation Safety Agency (EASA) 12 years ago. He also spent two years in Montreal for the development of ICAO Annex 19, 1st Edition “Safety management”. Member of the ICAO safety management panel, he is also safety management expert for EASA. He participated in the development of several papers, such as “Risk-based oversight”, “Performance-based environment” and “Inspector competencies”.
Download Presentations

Full Industry Day Article
Presenter Abstracts & Biographies
Industry Day Participant List
Welcome Address
Simple SMS in a Complex Operational Arrangement – Marginal Gains by Tendai MUTAMBIRWA (easyJet)
SMS Implementation at Iberia Maintenance – Success Keys and Lessons Learnt (Part-145) by Juan Ramón MATEOS (Iberia)
SMS – It Is Simple, Keep It That by Andreas BETZOLL (Pilatus Aircraft Ltd Switzerland)
The CANSO Standard of Excellence in SMS – Driving Continuous Safety Improvement by Owen DAVIES (NATS)
Using PDCA Lifecycle to Keep Your SMS Simple by Huw ROSS (HELIOS)
Management of Safety versus SMS by Steve HARRISS (Baines Simmons)
Safety Management Implementation in Dublin and Cork Airports by Robert O’REGAN (Dublin & Cork Airports)
SMS for Airports – The Copenhagen Approach by Dorte NYGAARD (Copenhagen Airports A/S, Denmark)
SMS within Authorised Training Organisations (ATO) by Thomas Leoff (Lufthansa Aviation Training)
SMS Implementation for General Aviation – FFA by Daniel Bolot and Daniel Vacher (French Aeronautical Federation)
Cooperation “Industry – Regulator” to Foster the SMS Implementation by Gilles Fontaine (ASD) and Jean-Pierre Arnaud (EASA)

Industry Day Event Archive
The Safety Management Systems International Collaboration Group (SM ICG), a group of 18 aviation regulatory bodies, was established in 2009. Since its formation, the group has produced several products and has begun to focus more on outreach to the greater international aviation community. To that end, the SM ICG has begun holding Industry Day events during its semi-annual meetings. Read more about other SM ICG Industry Day events




Categories


SM ICG Safety Management Products












Feedback