DHC2, Squaw Lake Quebec Canada, 2005











  DHC2, Squaw Lake Quebec Canada, 2005









Summary

On 1st September 2005, a DHC-2 Beaver, crashed near Squaw Lake, Quebec, Canada, following loss of control in poor weather and moderate to severe turbulence.




Event Details

When

01/09/2005



Event Type


HF,
              LOC,
              WX




Day/Night

Day



Flight Conditions

IMC







Flight Details

Aircraft


 

DE HAVILLAND CANADA DHC-2









Operator

NordPlus



Type of Flight

Public Transport (Passenger)



Take-off Commenced

Yes



Flight Airborne

Yes



Flight Completed

No



Phase of Flight

Cruise








Location

Approx.

11 nm northwest of Squaw Lake and 4 nm east of Elross Lake










HF

Tag(s)


              Manual Handling,
              Procedural non compliance
          




LOC

Tag(s)


              Environmental Factors
          




WX

Tag(s)


              En route In-cloud air turbulence,
              Low Level Windshear
          




Outcome

Damage or injury

Yes



Aircraft damage

Hull loss



Non-aircraft damage

Yes



Non-occupant Casualties

No



Occupant Fatalities

Most or all occupants



Off Airport Landing

Yes



Ditching

Yes




Causal Factor Group(s)

Group(s)

Aircraft Operation




Safety Recommendation(s)

Group(s)

Aircraft Operation




Investigation Type

Type

Independent









Description
On 1st September 2005, a DHC-2 Beaver, crashed near Squaw Lake, Quebec, Canada, following loss of control in poor weather and moderate to severe turbulence.
Synopsis
The following is the synopsis from the official report published by the Transportation Safety Board of Canada:
"The float-equipped de Havilland DHC-2 Beaver…departed the outfitter base camp at Squaw Lake, Quebec[1], at 0925 eastern daylight time, with a passenger and a few supplies on board, for a round-trip visual flight rules (VFR) flight to two wilderness camps, Camp 2 and Camp Pons. The weather in Squaw Lake was suitable for visual flight at the time of take-off but was forecast to deteriorate later in the day. The pilot completed the flights to the two camps and on the way back to Squaw Lake, the weather forced the pilot to make a precautionary landing on Elross Lake[2], 15 nm northwest of Squaw Lake. At 1630, he reported to the company via high frequency (HF) radio that he intended to take off from Elross Lake, as there seemed to be a break in the weather. Rescue efforts were initiated in the evening when the aircraft did not arrive at the base camp. The aircraft was located at 1230 the following day, 4 nm from Elross Lake…The aircraft was destroyed by a post-impact fire. The pilot sustained fatal injuries."
The report makes the following statement regarding the cause and contributing factors:
"The pilot attempted to cross the mountain ridge in adverse weather, and the aircraft stalled at an altitude from which recovery was not possible. Loss of visual references, strong updrafts, moderate to severe turbulence and possible wind shear likely contributed to the onset of the aerodynamic stall."
Related Articles

Mountain Waves
Weather
Human Factors

Further Reading

^ Schefferville/Squaw Lake Water Aerodrome (TC LID: CSZ9 (54°49′41″ N, 66°48′5″ W))
^ Elross Lake (54°52'0" N, 67°9'57" W)


For further information on this particular incident, see the full TSB Accident Report