Industry Day - December 2015











  Industry Day - December 2015









Article Information

Category:



SM ICG Safety Management Products 








Content source:




 SM ICG





 









Content control:




 SM ICG





 















Second Industry Day Event in Canada Focuses on Small Aviation Organizations
For the seventh time, the Safety Management International Collaboration Group (SM ICG), a group of 16 aviation regulatory bodies, held its semi-annual Industry Day event with representatives from 15 Canadian aviation industry organizations on December 11, 2015 in Vancouver, Canada. This event was a gathering of smaller aviation operators and marks the second opportunity for Canadian aviation service providers to hear directly from authorities that are working together and to provide feedback on SM ICG products. The full day session, hosted by Transport Canada Civil Aviation (TCCA), included eight industry presentations and an open discussion on Safety Management Systems (SMS) scalability.
The SM ICG was established in 2009 to promote a common understanding of safety management principles and requirements, facilitating their application across the international aviation community. Since its formation, the group has published many products and several have been translated into French, German, Portuguese, and Spanish. In recent years, the SM ICG has increased outreach to the greater international aviation community. The Industry Day event has been so well received in Europe that organizers received twice the offers to present than the meeting agenda could accommodate. The inaugural Industry Day event was held in Ottawa, Canada in 2012 with subsequent events held in The Hague, Netherlands, Seattle, Washington, USA, Bern, Switzerland, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, and Cologne, Germany.
Trevor Heryet, Executive Regional Director at the Transport Canada Pacific Region, welcomed participants saying, "SMS scalability is an ongoing challenge, whether in fixed or rotary wing organizations. Not everyone here is required to implement SMS and your participation is a show of good, collective leadership. You see the value of SMS and are implementing it voluntarily to benefit your organizations.” Judi Bethune, Safety Systems Manager at Flair Airlines, described the challenges her small airline encountered and the solutions it devised to implement a Safety Management System (SMS), “Developing SMS has its own personal rewards because you know you are doing the right thing for your company.” After opening remarks, Simon Roberts, United Kingdom Civil Aviation Authority (UK CAA) SMS Programme Lead, gave an overview of the SM ICG and its work. Industry representatives (Doug Strachan and Peter Barratt, West Coast Helicopters; Cheryl Cahill, BC Institute of Technology; Michael Coughlin and Marvin Sjerdal, Pacific Sky Aviation; Mike Hooper, Nanaimo Airport; Edwin Torillo, Fraser Health Authority; Kevin Lemke, Cascade Aerospace, Clark Duimel, Pacific Flying Club; and Judi Bethune, Flair Airlines) presented their experiences with SMS scalability. Industry Day speaker biographies and presentations are available for download at the bottom of this page.
Industry Day participants discussed SMS scalability and implementation in their organizations. Topics included practical perspectives on hazard identification through resolution, opportunities for help from students, retention of knowledge, the challenge of creating a single focal point in an organization, the challenges of having multiple regulators and standards and how to satisfy all of those entities while remaining productive and efficient, benefits of SMS, effective management system integration, and the importance of having a clear picture of what can be built incrementally.
Rosalie Kamp, Civil Aviation Safety Inspector in Technical Program and Evaluation at TCCA, and current SM ICG Steering Committee member, summed up the event’s importance, "This is a unique opportunity for small operators to speak to regulators from around the world.” Kevin Lemke, Vice President of Operations at Cascade Aerospace, thanked the group, “This is wonderful to see what the SM ICG is doing. Keep doing it. This standardization supports bilateral recognition and reduces regulatory burden on providers.” Edmund Bohland, acting Head of the Policy and Planning Department at EASA Flight Standards, and 2015 SM ICG Chair, thanked industry participants and concluded, "We recognize the need to support SMS scalability and hope that the SMS for Small Organizations products are useful to you. We welcome your feedback as we continue to work together and improve aviation safety across the globe."
Briefing Abstracts and Industry Presenter Biographies
Simon Roberts
UK CAA SM ICG Overview Bio:  Simon previously worked in the aircraft maintenance industry before joining the UK CAA. He has worked for the CAA for 17 years and spent the last 7 years focusing on Human Factors and Safety Management systems. His role has been to manage and harmonise the implementation of Safety Management Systems and oversight within the UK. This includes the development of Safety Management System (SMS) guidance material, oversight methodologies, evaluation tools, and training. He also chairs the European Human Factors Advisory Group (EHFAG).
Doug Strachan and Peter Barratt
West Coast Helicopters SMS for an Intermediate Size Rotary Wing Company with an AMO - Can this system be scaled? Abstract:  A presentation on the company safety management system for West Coast Helicopters as well as an introduction to the use of Microsoft Sharepoint in SMS filing, a free application. You can decide to yourself to what extent this system can be scaled.
Bio:  Doug Strachan, past Chief Pilot for West Coast Helicopters, a medium sized rotary wing utility company, and currently, the Company Aviation Safety Officer for the past 10 years.
Cheryl Cahill
B.C. Institute of Technology Scaling SMS for Airports and Air Operators: From Theory to Practice (How Students Can Help) Abstract:  Theory to Practice: A review of BCIT Airport Operation’s student engagement with industry in supporting SMS in a small airport context. Bio: Cheryl Cahill leads two diploma programs at the British Columbia Institute of Technology (BCIT) which focus on aviation operations, administration and management and airline and flight operations for commercial pilots. She holds a Master’s degree in Aeronautical Sciences: Aviation/Aerospace Educational Technology from Embry Riddle Aeronautical University and is a board member with Aviation Leadership Foundation.
Michael Couglin and Marvin Sjerdal
Pacific Sky Aviation Scaling SMS for a Private Operator with AMO and FTU Abstract:  So much regulation, so little time! How can small but complex company stay compliant, productive and efficient? Bio: Michael Coughlin, CEO at Pacific Sky Aviation, has served in senior management roles at OEM’s (Douglas Aircraft, Bombardier, Honeywell), airframe engine and component MRO’s (Vector Aerospace, Cascade Aerospace, CHC Helicopters). Now leading a “small but complex” company through steady growth of capabilities and people. Bio: Marvin Sjerdal, Manager of Quality Assurance and SMS at Pacific Sky, is an industry veteran (AME, MDM, Director of Maintenance, Airworthiness, Quality and Engineering, founding partner at Penta, former Director at PAMEA and industry advisor to BCIT, CAMC evaluator). Has a passion for regulations and the CARs!
Mike Hooper
Nanaimo Airport Scaling SMS for an Airport Abstract:  Mike’s presentation will focus on the implementation of an SMS at a small airport. Including the opportunities and challenges to overcome with limited funding and staffing levels. Bio: Mike Hooper is the CEO and “Accountable Executive” of the Nanaimo Airport.
Tom Vukelich and Edwin Torillo
Fraser Health Authority Scaling SMS for Hospital Heliports Abstract:  Implementing the TC SMS into the IPS Heliport Management Program. Bio: Tom Vukelich is a Manager with Integrated Protections Services (IPS) in their Contract Management and Strategic Initiatives stream. He has been in the healthcare specific security field since 1994. His current role is the Security Contract Performance Manager for the Lower Mainland Health Organizations and he also supports Edwin Torillo as his designate for the IPS Heliport Management Program. Bio: Edwin Torillo is a Coordinator with Integrated Protections Services (IPS) in their Contract Management and Strategic Initiatives stream. He has been in the healthcare specific security field since 2010. His current role is the Heliport Management Coordinator for the Lower Mainland Health Organizations, which he assumed in May of this year. Edwin continues to work on improving the IPS Heliport Management Program.
Kevin Lemke
Cascade Aerospace Integrating SMS with Other Management System Requirements in a Design and Manufacturing Organization Abstract:  Kevin will be discussing the challenges mid-sized aerospace design, maintenance and modification that companies face when establishing processes to comply with the various different regulatory agencies requirements and quality standards. Bio: Kevin Lemke joined the RCAF in 1983 as an Aerospace Engineering Officer, retiring from service in 2004. He has since been employed in three commercial aerospace companies including as a Program Director at Cascade Aerospace in Abbotsford BC, the Director of Maintenance and Engineering at Heli-One in Delta BC and as the VP Production at IMP Aerospace in Halifax Nova Scotia. He returned to Cascade Aerospace in spring 2015 as the VP Operations.
Clark Duimel
Pacific Flying Club Scaling SMS for a Flight Training Unit with AMO Abstract:  The presentation will be about the development of the Safety Management System at Pacific Flying Club and the challenges of scaling a Safety Management System. Bio: Clark Duimel is the Executive Director Flight Operations for Pacific Flying Club and has over 26 years of experience in Flight Training and Aircraft Maintenance. In 2005 Clark was presented the David Charles Abramson Memorial” Flight Instructor Safety Award and continues to work with young pilots to help improve aviation safety.
Judi Bethune
Flair Airlines Scaling SMS for an Airline with AMO Abstract:  This presentation will discuss the challenges encountered by a small airline and the solutions devised to implement a Safety Management System that is compliant and has the capability to handle a growing amount of work and the potential to accommodate rapid growth, including the addition of an AMO. Bio: Judi Bethune, Safety Systems Manager for Flair Airlines, holds a Master of Business Administration in Aerospace Management, a Certificate in Safety Management Systems and is an Airline Transport Rated pilot. Judi designed and implemented the current safety management system that FLAIR Airlines is using and is a beta tester for the host program.
Download Presentations

Full Industry Day Article
Briefing Abstracts and Presenter Biographies
SM ICG Overview by Simon Roberts (UK CAA)
SMS for an Intermediate Size Rotary Wing Company with an AMO - Can this system be scaled? by Doug Strachan and Peter Barratt (West Coast Helicopters) - Speaker presented without briefing materials
Scaling SMS for Airports and Air Operators: From Theory to Practice (How Students Can Help) by Cheryl Cahill (B.C. Institute of Technology)
Scaling SMS for a Private Operator with AMO and FTU by Michael Coughlin and Marvin Sjerdal (Pacific Sky Aviation)
Scaling SMS for an Airport by Mike Hooper (Nanaimo Airport)
Scaling SMS for Hospital Heliports by Tom Vukelich and Edwin Torillo (Fraser Health Authority)
Integrating SMS with Other Management System Requirements in a Design and Manufacturing Organization by Kevin Lemke (Cascade Aerospace)
Scaling SMS for a Flight Training Unit with AMO by Clark Duimel (Pacific Flying Club)
Scaling SMS for an Airline with AMO by Judi Bethune (Flair Airlines)

Industry Day Event Archive
The Safety Management Systems International Collaboration Group (SM ICG), a group of 16 aviation regulatory bodies, was established in 2009. Since its formation, the group has produced several products and has begun to focus more on outreach to the greater international aviation community. To that end, the SM ICG has begun holding Industry Day events during its semi-annual meetings. Read more about other SM ICG Industry Day events




Categories


SM ICG Safety Management Products












Feedback