Contingency Planning











  Contingency Planning









Article Information

Category:



ANS Contingency Planning







Content source:




 SKYbrary





 









Content control:




 SKYbrary





 















Definition
Contingency planning demonstrates how the aims from the set of requirements that have evolved from the Policy and Operational Concept will be achieved. It also outlines the strategies/actions and resources required. The product(s) of this step is (are) the contingency plan(s).
Objective
The objective of contingency planning is to develop a set of detailed plans that will satisfy the requirements identified by stakeholders during the consultation process so that they can be executed during a future adverse event.
Description
The Planning activities may be organised as follows:

Inventory of the Units/services/functions of an air navigation service provider (ANSP) - it is essential that the process be applied to the whole portfolio of air navigation service (ANS) units, services and functions (either provided or supplied). An inventory of resources (e.g. systems, procedures, and staff) should also be made.
Identification of “realistic events” - for each ANS unit, the “events” that may lead to loss or disruption of service or function should be identified. The likelihood of the events is to be considered to identify which ones are “realistic”.
Check if a plan already exists to manage the consequences of the “realistic events”. This question is the foundation of the contingency planning process.
Develop or change contingency measures - in this step, an ANSP should ensure first that safety and security requirements are met. Plan(s) should be developed to deal with “emergency” and “degraded modes” of operation. In addition, if there is a need to ensure service continuity, and if this is “viable” (in terms of policy/operational concept /economics), “service continuity” plan(s) might be developed.
For all plans, safety and security assessments should be conducted. The aim of this step is to ensure that the planned contingency measures meet safety and security requirements set at the Policy step.
For “service continuity” measures, an economic assessment of the viability of the plan would also be required since “business” considerations are likely to drive the development of such plan(s).
Develop measures for “recovery back to normal operations”

Related Articles

Contingency Process
Economic Assessment Of Contingency Plans
Safety Management for Contingency
Security Management for Contingency

Further Reading

For further information on Contingency Planning see the EUROCONTROL, Guidelines for Contingency Planning for Air Navigation Services (including Service Continuity)
Examples of Contingency in ATM and Critical Infrastructures- Presentation by Prof. Chris Johnson, Univeristy of Glasgow
Contingency Planning of Air Navigation Services- Review of EUROCONTROL Guidelines, presentation by Gerald Amar, EUROCONTROL
Sometimes heared on Contingency: Your expectations and definitions of Contingency Contingency planning definitions review,expectations to improve Contingency Plans, harmonisation and maturity.
Round table discussion and Lessons Learned from SASI WS 2008 How ATM Contingency Planning is conducted in your State? and What is impeding Contingency process from happening? presentation by Gerald Amar, EUROCONTROL
Overview of Contingency and the EUROCONTROL guidelines Regulatory aspects for Contingency overview and scheme for how to pass through an emergency situation and return to the normal operation.
See also the EUROCONTROL Reference Guide to EUROCONTROL Guidelines for Contingency Planning, particularly in Section 6.





Categories


ANS Contingency Planning












Feedback