Cloud codes and chart symbols











  Cloud codes and chart symbols









Article Information

Category:



Weather 








Content source:




 SKYbrary





 









Content control:




 SKYbrary





 















Description
In the 1939 edition of the International Cloud Atlas, the World Meteorological Organization assigned a unique identification code, and accompanying symbol, to cloud species, with the dropped middle letter denoting the altitude band to which the cloud belongs. Cloud height is based on the height of the cloud base, regardless of how high the cloud top may get. The cloud symbol is used when plotting station models on surface weather maps.
This 27 part classificatory system places much greater emphasis on the processes of cloud growth and decay.
Cloud codes and symbols
Low Clouds
Cloud base usually below 6,500 ft.
Low Clouds



Identification code
Cloud symbol
Specification
Example cloud Genera/Species




CL1

Cumulus clouds with little vertical extent and seemingly flattened (humilis), are ragged cumulus other than that of bad weather (fractus)
Cumulus humilis, Cumulus fractus


CL2

Cumulus clouds of moderate or strong vertical extent, generally with protuberances in the form of domes or towers, sometimes accompanied by other cumuliform clouds, all with their bases at the same level.
Cumulus congestus, Cumulus mediocris


CL3

Cumulonimbus cloud, its summit lacking sharp outlines, being neither clearly fibrous, nor in the shape of an anvil.
Cumulonimbus calvus


CL4

Stratocumulus formed from the spreading out of cumulus clouds, the remains of which may also be apparent in the sky.
Stratocumulus cumulogenitus


CL5

Stratocumulus not resulting from the spreading out of cumulus clouds.
Stratocumulus stratiformis, Stratocumulus castellanus, Stratocumulus lenticulari


CL6

Stratus in a more or less continuous sheet or layer, or in ragged sheets, or both, but no stratus fractus of bad weather
Stratus nebulosus


CL7

Stratus fractus of bad weather or cumulus fractus of bad weather, or both (Pannus" pannus cloud).
Stratus fractus


CL8

Cumulus and stratocumulus other than that produced by the spreading out of cumulus, with the bases of the two cloud types being at different levels.
 


CL9

Cumulonimbus, the upper part of which is clearly fibrous (or cirriform), often in the shape of an anvil. This cloud may sometimes be accompanied by cumulonimbus calvus (without anvil).
Cumulonimbus capillatus



 
Medium Clouds
Cloud base between 6,500 ft and 20,000 ft.
Medium Clouds



Identification code
Cloud symbol
Specification
Example cloud Genera/Species




CM1

Altostratus, the greater part of which is semi-transparent; through this part of the sun or moon may be weakly visible, as through frosted glass.
Altostratus translucidus


CM2

Nimbostratus is a thicker for of altostratus opals, the greater part of which is dense enough to hide the sun or moon from view.
Altostratus opals, Nimbostratus


CM3

Altocumulus, the greater part of which is semi-transparent; the various elements of the cloud change only slowly and are all at a single level.
Altocumulus translucidus, Altocumulus stratiformis


CM4

Patches of altocumulus, often lenticular, the greater parts of which are semi-transparent; these clouds occur vat more than one level and are continually changing in appearance.
 


CM5

Semi-transparent altocumulus, either in bands or in one or more fairly continuous layers, which progressively invade the sky, growing thicker as they do so.
Altocumulus stratiformis


CM6

Altocumulus resulting from the spreading out of cumulus(or cumulonimbus) clouds.
Altocumulus cumulogenitus.


CM7

Altocumulus translucides, stratiformis or opaques in two or more layers, not progressively invading the sky; or a single layer of altocumulus opals or altocumulus stratiformis, not progressively invading the sky; or altocumulus appearing with altostratus and/or nimbostratus.
Altocumulus duplicatus


CM8

Altocumulus with sprouting either in the form of towers or castellations (castellanus) or small tufts (floccus).
Altocumulus castellanus, altocumulus floccus


CM9

Altocumulus of a chaotic sky, generally at several levels.
 



 
High Clouds
Cloud base above 20,000 ft:
High Clouds



Identification code
Cloud symbol
Specification
Example cloud Genera/Species




CH1

Cirrus clouds in the form of filaments, stands or hooks, not progressively invading the sky.
Cirrus uncinus, cirrus fibratus


CH2

Dense cirrus, in patches or sheaves, which usually do not increase (spissatus); or cirrus with sprouting either in the form of small turrets or battlements (castellanus) or small cumuliform tufts (floccus).
Cirrus spissatus, cirrus castellanus, cirrus floccus.


CH3

Dense cirrus, often in the form of an anvil, being the remains of the upper parts of a cumulonimbus cloud.
Cirrus spissatus cumulonimbogenitus.


CH4

Cirrus in the form of hooks (uncinus) or filaments (fibratus) progressively invading the sky, generally thickening as they do so.
Cirrus uncinus, cirrus fibratus.


CH5

Cirrus, often in bands, with cirrostratus, or cirrostratus on its own, progressively invading the sky, and growing denser as it does so, but the continuous veil of cloud does not reach 45 degrees above the horizon.
Cirrostratus


CH6

Cirrus, often in bands, with cirrostratus, or cirrostratus on its own, progressively invading the sky, and growing denser as it does so, with the continuous veil of cloud does extending more than 45 degrees above the horizon although without the sky being totally covered.
Cirrostratus


CH7

A veil of cirrostratus which covers the entire sky.
Cirrostratus nebulous, cirrostratus fibratus


CH8

A veil of cirrostratus which neither covers the entire sky nor progressively invades it.
Cirrostratus


CH9

Cirrocumulus appearing alone, or with cirrus and/or cirrostratus, as long as the cirrocumulus is predominant.
Cirrocumulus stratiformis, cirrocumulus floccus, cirrocumulus lenticularis



Related Articles

Cloud Classification: Genera and Species





Categories


Weather,
              Cloud Formation












Feedback