Single Sky Committee











  Single Sky Committee









Article Information

Category:



Single European Sky 








Content source:




 SKYbrary





 









Content control:




 EUROCONTROL





 















Composition and Objectives
The Single Sky Committee (SSC) has been established to support the European Commission in the implementation of the Single European Sky. It is composed by two representatives of each European Union Member State (civil and military) and observers from third countries and EUROCONTROL. Each Member State delegation is considered to be one committee member. The SSC is chaired by a representative from the European Commission. The Chairman may decide to invite experts to talk on particular matters, at the request of a member or on his/her own initiative.
The Commission will submit to this committee the measures to be taken with regard to policy and regulatory matters. Specific questions could be examined, where appropriate, within working groups reporting to the SSC. The Committee thus ensures an appropriate consideration of the interests of all categories of users.
Way of Working
The Single Sky Committee gives its agreement on the draft implementing rules or community specifications that have been drafted by the mandated organisations before the European Commission adopts them. Opinions are issued upon majority voting by committee members. Experts, observers and representatives of third countries must withdraw when the Committee moves to a vote. If necessary and justified, the committee's opinion can be obtained by a written procedure.
The European Parliament is kept informed about the work of the Committee by means of SSC meeting reports describing each agenda point and the result of the vote on the proposed measures submitted to the Committee.
The Committee's discussions are kept confidential. The principles and conditions concerning public access to the Committee's documents are the same as those defined in Regulation (CE) No 1049/2001. It is for the European Commission to take a decision on the request for access to those documents.
Further Reading
European Commission

Air Transport Portal of the European Commission - Single European Sky





Categories


Single European Sky












Feedback