Industry Day - October 2013











  Industry Day - October 2013









Article Information

Category:



SM ICG Safety Management Products 








Content source:




 SM ICG





 









Content control:




 SM ICG





 















SM ICG Holds Third 'Industry Day' Outreach Event in Seattle
The Safety Management International Collaboration Group (SM ICG), a group of 12 aviation regulatory bodies, held its third Industry Day with representatives from 25 US aviation industry organizations and one Brazilian company on October 25, 2013 in Seattle, Washington. Industry Day delivers a rare opportunity for aviation service providers to hear directly from authorities that are working together and for those authorities to receive feedback on SM ICG products. The full day session, hosted by the US Federal Aviation Administration (FAA), included nine presentations and open discussions on the successes and challenges aviation service providers have experienced in their implementation of Safety Management Systems (SMS).
The SM ICG was established in 2009 to promote a common understanding of safety management principles and requirements, facilitating their application across the international aviation community. Since its formation, the group has published several products and has begun to focus more on outreach to the greater international aviation community. The SM ICG has held two previous Industry Day events during its semi-annual meetings. The first was with Canadian aviation industry representatives in Ottawa, Canada in October 2012; and the second event took place with European aviation industry representatives in The Hague, Netherlands in April 2013.
Amer Younossi, Team Lead for Safety Management and SM ICG Lead for the FAA, kicked off the event by acknowledging that both aviation service providers and regulators face challenges in safety management implementation. He pointed out that "The purpose of this meeting is to share. As a group of regulators, we are trying to pool our expertise to create guidance and provide input to the International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO). This is a good opportunity to hear from our aviation service providers."
After opening remarks, Amer Younossi gave an overview of the SM ICG and its work. Ten industry representatives (David Chapel, General Electric; Doug Kihm, Boeing; Fred Etheridge, Rick Trusis, and Carmen Schooley, Gulfstream; Scott Mabrey, United Airlines; Captain Al Madar, American Airlines; Armando Martinez, Miami Air; Ben Crown, Delta Air Lines; and Pam Montgomery, FlightSafety International) briefed their experiences with SMS. Mike Reinert, Don Arendt, and Rafael Quezada of the FAA moderated discussions throughout the day. Industry Day speaker biographies and all presentations are available for download at the bottom of this page.
Industry Day participants discussed both safety management successes and challenges. Topics included approvals from multiple States looking at a service provider SMS, safety partnerships, reporting programs and just culture, leadership engagement, and the value of SMS during organizational change.
Captain Al Madar, Managing Director of Corporate Safety at American Airlines, found the discussion very useful and noted, "There are a lot of focus groups for operators to share on SMS and this is the first time I have seen one for regulators to share. This can only help bridge the disconnect between the regulatory environment and operator environment." Jacqueline Booth, Chief of Technical Program Evaluation and Coordination at Transport Canada and current SM ICG Chair, thanked industry participants and concluded, "As we SM ICG members are using our combined experience to promote harmonization and advance SMS and State Safety Programme (SSP) implementation, we want to hear about your triumphs and challenges. That collaborative dialog will help us focus our efforts and develop products that will be useful to the global aviation community."
Briefing Abstracts and Industry Presenter Biographies
David Chapel
Flight Safety and Reliability Director, Safety and Certification, General Electric SMS Promotion and Assessment Abstract:  The presentation focuses on three main areas: 1) GE Aviation conducted an assessment relative to the ICAO Annex 8 Appendix and found that the area of safety promotion was an area that needed additional focus. The rollout of GE’s SMS this year has been heavily focused on awareness and promotion. Several of these efforts will be reviewed; 2) The SMS ICG has released an SMS evaluation tool. GE has completed an initial application of this tool and will present the findings associated with using the tool; and 3) Third party accreditation as a means to qualify industry’s SMS programs for international regulatory use and assurance will be reviewed.
Bio: Dave was born in Wisconsin and grew up in Springfield, Illinois. He attended Arizona State University where he completed his B.S. degree in Aerospace Engineering in 1983. He followed that with a M.S.E in Engineering Science (Materials) in 1989. Dave completed an M.B.A. from Mercer University in December 2009. Dave has also completed the USC Aviation Safety program and is an experienced aircraft accident investigator. In August 1983, Dave began his aviation career as an engine performance engineer in Phoenix at the Garrett Turbine Engine Company which ultimately evolved into AlliedSignal and then Honeywell. In 2001, Dave joined Gulfstream Aircraft Corporation in Savannah, GA where he had progressive leadership roles working on new product development. Dave‘s final position at Gulfstream was as Flight Sciences Director of Advanced Aircraft Programs. Dave joined GE Aviation and the Chief Engineer’s Office in December 2010. Dave is currently responsible for Flight Safety and Reliability efforts and his group is driving the initiatives related to incorporation of Safety Management Systems (SMS) at GE Aviation. Dave likes flying, hiking, kayaking, board games, woodworking, archery, and astronomy. Dave is married to Cynthia and has two grown daughters, three cats, and three dogs.
Doug Kihm
Technical Fellow, Systems Engineering - Regulatory Compliance & ETOPS, Boeing Boeing Safety Management Overview Abstract:  Boeing will present a Boeing Aviation Safety overview, a summary of Boeing’s participation in FAA Design & Manufacturing SMS Pilot Project, Boeing’s experience with SMS implementation and approval for our repair station and a perspective for the future.
Bio:  Doug Kihm has worked for The Boeing Company for over 30 years. He has a Bachelors and Masters of Science in Mechanical Engineering. He is a Boeing Technical Fellow specializing in Airplane Design, Safety, Certification and ETOPS. He a technical representative for Boeing and International Coordinating Council of Aerospace Industries Association (ICCAIA) to several regulatory standards development groups including ICAO’s Safety Management Panel, Airworthiness Panel and Operations Panel and FAA’s Safety Management System Aviation Rulemaking Committee.
Fred Etheridge, Rick Trusis, and Carmen Schooley
Manager, Compliance and Technical Training, Gulfstream; Director of Airworthiness and Certification, Gulfstream; and Manager of SMS for Engineering, Gulfstream Gulfstream SMS Abstract:  This presentation will introduce corporate experiences and lessons-learned when implementing an SMS. Highlights from Gulfstream's Programs, Engineering & Test organization will cover Continued Operational Safety (COS) and SMS experiences launching in that type of business unit. Fred Etheridge Bio: Fred is the corporate SMS manager at Gulfstream Aerospace Corporation and provides leadership, strategic planning and direction, oversight and execution of the corporations overall SMS, spanning across all business units. Fred has more than 20 years of program development and management expertise within aviation safety, maintenance and flight safety. Operational experience includes time spent with the NTSB as an aircraft accident investigator, Flight Engineer in the U.S. Army and holds an A & P license. Fred participates in several industry and NAA aviation rules committees and advisory groups for SMS and human factors. Rick Trusis Bio: Rick has over 30 years of aviation experience which includes having worked for several engine and aircraft OEM's and several years on the regulatory side with Transport Canada. He has been a FAA Administrative and Powerplant DER and established the framework for Gulfstream's ODA unit. In his current role as the Director of Airworthiness & Certification for Gulfstream Aerospace, Rick is responsible for the Certification, Continued Operational Safety and accident investigations of all Gulfstream aircraft. He helped lead Gulfstream's efforts associated with their participation in the FAA SMS Pilot program, was a participant in the ICAO / ICCAIA SMS Working Group and is currently helping deploy SMS elements across Gulfstream's engineering organization.
Scott Mabrey
Senior Manager Aviation Safety Reporting Programs, United Airlines Safety Management International Collaboration Group Abstract:  This presentation to the Safety Management International Collaboration Group is broken in to four sections: Overview of Airline Safety, Tactical and Strategic Approaches to Safety Risk Management, Value of Safety, and Safety Partnerships. Bio: Before joining United Airlines in 2007, Scott Mabrey was employed by SkyWest Airlines as a Line Check Airman, Charter Program Manager and he led classroom instruction for SkyWest’s fuel management initiatives. In 2009, he transitioned to the Manager – Quality Control position in United’s Flight Operations Division and was promoted to Manager – Risk Management & Safety Management Systems in 2010. Scott assumed the role of Safety Management System Programs Manager for the United and Continental subsidiaries in 2010 and now oversees the airline’s safety reporting programs as a Sr. Manger in the Corporate Safety and Quality Assurance Division. Scott is type rated in the B737, CL-65 and EMB-120. He also holds an A & P certificate.
Captain Al Madar
Managing Director Corporate Safety, American Airlines The Value of SMS during Periods of Corporate Stress and as a Tool to Promote Safety Bio: Captain Al Madar is presently Managing Director of Corporate Safety for American Airlines. In this role, Captain Madar oversees American’s Safety Management System and all operational safety programs. Captain Madar joined American Airlines in1984 as a pilot in Chicago. Since that time, Captain Madar has served in various positions including Captain, Check Airman, FAA Designee on the Boeing 767 / 757 aircraft, and Captain on the Boeing 727. He has also served in a number of management positions including Chief Pilot in MIA, Chief Pilot ORD, Manager Flight Operations Technical, Manager Flight Training and Standards, Attorney, Director Crew Security, and Managing Director of System Operations Control (SOC). In addition, Captain Madar has recently served as one of three Tri-Chairs of the FAA SMS ARC, Chair of the oneworld Alliance Safety Group and is currently Vice-Chair of the IATA Safety Group as well as the A4A Safety Council. Prior to joining American Airlines, Captain Madar spent 21 years in the Air Force Reserves and Air National Guard flying F-100, F-105, F-4, and F-16 aircraft. He also served as a pilot and attorney for Braniff Airlines from 1976-1984. A native of Dearborn, Michigan, Captain Madar is a graduate of Oakland University and holds a Juris Doctorate from the University of Detroit.
Armando Martinez
Senior Director of Safety and Security, Miami Air Successes and Challenges of SMS Implementation at Miami Air Abstract:  Successful SMS implementation starts with upper management, requires a few tools and a lot of hard work, but in the end it is all worth it. Bio: Mr. Martinez graduated from Miami-Dade Community College with an Associates of Arts Degree in Aviation in 1968. Following graduation, Mr. Martinez flew with several cargo companies located in Miami, Florida. In 1971, he cofounded Miami Air Lease with a DC-3 aircraft, later incorporating C-46 and DC-6 aircraft. While there he earned his Airline Transport Pilot Certificate and A& P license. In 1986, he sold his shares in that company and pursued his love of flying with various airlines. He flew various types of aircraft, including Boeing 707, and acquired type-ratings on the DC-3, C-46, DC-6, ATR-42, Boeing 727 and 747--Accumulating over 12,000 hours of Pilot in Command and over 17,000 hours Total Time in 40 years of flying. In July 2001, he joined Falcon Air Express as Chief Pilot. Subsequently he was promoted to the position of Director of Operations. In 2006 Falcon Air Express declared bankruptcy. He was then assigned by the bankruptcy court as Chief Operating Officer. The company was subsequently sold and as Director of Operations, he helped guide the company back to profitability. In August 2008, he was offered and accepted a position with Miami Air International, Inc. In January of 2009, he became Director of Safety and was put in charge of the development and implementation of the SMS program.
Ben Crown
Manager SMS, Delta Air Lines Collective Efforts in Safety Management: The Role of Our Partners in SMS Abstract:  As Delta continues to refine and grow organizational effectiveness of our SMS, it is our belief that the next phase of successful SMS implementation involves collective efforts in safety management strategies amongst our SkyTeam partners and Delta Connection affiliates. This presentation will provide an overview of Delta’s approach to safety management beyond our own operation and offer insight into the role our partners play in Delta’s risk management and safety assurance processes, and vice versa. Bio: Ben Crown is the Manager, Safety Management Systems (SMS) at Delta Air Lines. His direct areas of oversight include daily management of Delta’s SMS, working with all Delta operating divisions to ensure safety hazards are properly identified and mitigated, interfacing with industry working groups and regulatory agencies, benchmarking with industry peers, and conducting cross-divisional safety risk assessments. Additionally, Ben serves as the co-chair of the Delta/FAA (Delta CMO) SMS steering committee and is a key leader in the company’s six Safety Round Tables (SRTs) as well as the Integrated Safety Round Table (ISRT). Ben’s involvement in the aviation industry began in 1996 when he earned his airman certificate. After briefly working in the non-profit sector, Ben’s airline management career began when he joined Atlantic Southeast Airlines in the Inflight Services division with direct oversight of the airline’s Flight Attendant operational and training manuals. Ben came to Delta Air Lines in early 2007 and has since managed flight crew operating manuals for the Boeing 737 fleet, successfully integrated operational manuals during Delta’s merger with Northwest Airlines in 2008, and coordinated the development and continued implementation of Delta’s SMS across all operating divisions.
Pam Montgomery
Operations Quality Management System Specialist, FlightSafety International Challenges and Lessons Learned Implementing SMS at FlightSafety International Abstract:  This presentation highlights the unique challenges and lessons learned during the design and implementation of FlightSafety International’s Safety Management System. Bio: Pam Montgomery entered aviation after spending 8 years as co owner and operator of a lawn care and landscape business in Findlay, Ohio. In 1995 she enrolled at Bowling Green State University to pursue a Bachelor degree in Aviation Studies. During that time, she was a contributing author for Plane and Pilot News, interned with the National Transportation Safety Board in Washington, DC and spoke at FAA Safety Seminars on aviation human factors topics. Pam is a type rated pilot in the CE-500, holds a Commercial Pilot Airplane Single Engine & Multi Engine Land, Certified Flight Instructor Airplane, Instrument and Advanced Instrument Ground Instructor ratings. Pam joined FlightSafety International in 1999 and instructed in the KingAir 200 and Citation 500 series aircraft at the Toledo Learning Center. She was awarded the FAA Instructor of the Year for the Cleveland Area District in 2002 and for the Great Lakes Region in 2003. Since then, she assisted with the design and implementation of FlightSafety’s Quality Management System and companywide ISO-9001 registration and earned a Masters in Aeronautical Science from Embry-Riddle Aeronautical University where she specialized in Human Factors in Aviation Systems and Space Studies. Pam currently works with FlightSafety Operations supporting the design, implementation and ongoing improvement of the SMS.
Download Presentations

Full Industry Day Article
Briefing Abstracts and Presenter Biographies
SMS Promotion and Assessment by David Chapel (General Electric)
Boeing Safety Management Overview by Doug Kihm (Boeing)
Gulfstream SMS by Fred Etheridge, Rick Trusis, and Carmen Schooley (Gulfstream)
Safety Management International Collaboration Group by Scott Mabrey (United Airlines)
The Value of SMS during Periods of Corporate Stress and as a Tool to Promote Safety by Captain Al Madar (American Airlines)
Successes and Challenges of SMS Implementation at Miami Air by Armando Martinez (Miami Air)
Collective Efforts in Safety Management: The Role of Our Partners in SMS by Ben Crown (Delta Air Lines)
Challenges and Lessons Learned Implementing SMS at FlightSafety International by Pam Montgomery (FlightSafety International)

Industry Day Event Archive
The Safety Management Systems International Collaboration Group (SM ICG), a group of 12 aviation regulatory bodies, was established in 2009. Since its formation, the group has produced several products and has begun to focus more on outreach to the greater international aviation community. To that end, the SM ICG has begun holding Industry Day events during its semi-annual meetings. Read more about other SM ICG Industry Day events




Categories


SM ICG Safety Management Products












Feedback