Hindsight 20











  Hindsight 20









Article Information

Category:



General 








Content source:




 EUROCONTROL





 









Content control:




 SKYbrary





 
















Published in December 2014, HindSight 20 focused on Automation.
HindSight 20 Articles
Keynote

Keynote: by Frank Brenner.

Editorial

Local Warming: Editorial by Tzvetomir Blajev.
Human-centred automation for ATM: by Professor Sidney Dekker.

The View from Above

The 'Automation Problem': by Captain Ed Pooley.

Front Line Report

I love automation: by Eileen Runge.

Case Study

Case Study - On tour with Brent & Sid: by Bengt Collin.

Comment 1: by Dragan Milanovski.
Comment 2: by Alexander Krastev.
Comment 3: by Captain Ed Pooley.
Comment 4: by Captain Tom Becker.
Comment 5: by Mike Edwards.



From the Briefing Room

Automation as alien: challenges for human factors: by Professor Thomas Sheridan.
Who needs automation: by Jim Krieger.
Some lessons learned about pilots and flight deck automated systems: by Dr Kathy Abbot.
Safety and automation: by Adrian Bednarek.
Ergonomic system design in air traffic control - Incorporating a user-centred approach: by Andre Perrott.
Safety nets vs Controllers' risk perception and risk management: by Jean-Marc Flon.
How to sharpen your automated tools: by Dr Kim Cardosi.
Flying - digital or analogue?: by Captain Pradeep Deshpande.
New ATC procedures - unintended effects on the flight deck: by Colin Gill.
If it weren't for people...: by Dr Steven Shorrock.
Not all or nothing, not all the same: classifying automation in practice: by Dr Luca Save.
Maintaining basic skills while managing change: by Captain David McKenney.
Working on the edge of performance: the implications of automation: by Dr Tamsyn Edwards & Dr Barry Kirwan.
Automation in the flight deck, blessing or curse?: by Captain Dirk De Winter.
To follow or not to follow - is that really a question?: by Stan Drozdowski and Harry Hutchinson.
Will we ever automate the tasks of the ATCO?: by Job Bruggen.
Automation exceptions and flight path management: by Roger Cox.
Switching off automation: we know why, but not when: by Captain Wolfgang Starke.

Related SKYbrary Articles

Cockpit Automation - Advantages and Safety Challenges
Cockpit Automation - Advantages and Safety Challenges

Register to Receive Your Copy of HindSight Magazine
Register here for a hardcopy of HindSight magazine to be sent to you by post every time a new edition is published




Categories


General












Feedback