GLF4, Teterboro NJ USA, 2010











  GLF4, Teterboro NJ USA, 2010









Summary

On 1 October 2010, a Gulfstream G-IV being operated by General Aviation Flying Service as ‘Meridian Air Charter’ on a corporate flight from Toronto International to Teterboro made a deep landing on 1833m-long runway 06 at destination in normal day visibility and overran the end of the runway at a speed of 40 to 50 knots before coming to a stop 30m into a 122m long EMAS installation.




Event Details

When

01/10/2010



Event Type


HF,
              RE




Day/Night

Day



Flight Conditions

VMC







Flight Details

Aircraft


 

GULFSTREAM AEROSPACE Gulfstream 4









Operator

General Aviation Flying Service



Type of Flight

Private



Flight Origin




Toronto/Lester B. Pearson International Airport







Intended Destination




Teterboro







Take-off Commenced

Yes



Flight Airborne

Yes



Flight Completed

No



Phase of Flight

Landing








Location








Location - Airport

Airport

KTEB




General

Tag(s)


              Approach not stabilised,
              Non Precision Approach
          




HF

Tag(s)


              Fatigue,
              Manual Handling,
              Procedural non compliance,
              Violation
          




RE

Tag(s)


              Overrun on Landing,
              Excessive Airspeed,
              Late Touchdown,
              Significant Crosswind Component
          




Outcome

Damage or injury

Yes



Aircraft damage

Minor



Non-aircraft damage

Yes



Non-occupant Casualties

No



Off Airport Landing

No



Ditching

No




Causal Factor Group(s)

Group(s)

Aircraft Operation




Safety Recommendation(s)

Group(s)

None Made




Investigation Type

Type

Independent









Description
On 1 October 2010, a Gulfstream G-IV being operated by General Aviation Flying Service as ‘Meridian Air Charter’ on a corporate flight from Toronto International to Teterboro made a deep landing on 1833m-long runway 06 at destination in normal day visibility and overran the end of the runway at a speed of 40 kt to 50 kt before coming to a stop 30m into a 122m long Engineered Materials Arresting System installation. The aircraft suffered only minor damage and none of the 10 occupants were injured.

Photo: Zodiac Aerospace
Investigation
An Investigation was carried out by the National Transportation Safety Board (USA) (NTSB) and Flight Data Recorder (FDR) and Cockpit Voice Recorder (CVR) data was available to assist.
The weather at the time of the accident was found to have been light rain with broken cloud at 600ft aal and the wind northerly and gusting up to 20 knots. It was noted that the flight crew were on the second part of a split duty and that the aircraft commander had been acting as PF.
The LLZ approach made was found to have been unstable and below 500 ft aal, the speed had been allowed to increase to Reference Speed (Vref) + 24 where it remained until arrival over the runway and floating. An airport surveillance video showed that the aircraft eventually touched down with only 686m of runway remaining. Data from the aircraft manufacturer based on the ELW of the accident aircraft showed that the LDR had been approximately 860m on a dry runway or 1097m on a wet runway, without wind factoring. The failure to initiate (or apparently to even consider) initiating a go around when the airspeed became excessive was noted.
The full NTSB Final Report of the Investigation includes the following Probable Cause, determined by NTSB on 22 June 2011 as:
“The pilot-in-command's failure to attain the proper touchdown point while landing with a gusting crosswind and failure to initiate a go-around, which resulted in a landing more than halfway down the runway and a subsequent runway overrun.”
It was also considered that:
“Contributing to the incident was the failure of either pilot to call for a go-around when the airplane was at Vref plus 15 at 50 feet above the runway or once they had floated well beyond the touchdown zone of the runway.”
No Safety Recommendations were made.
Related Articles

Engineered Materials Arresting System
Landing Flare
Runway Excursion
Runway Overrun On Landing (OGHFA SE)
Runway End Safety Area
Missed Approach
Stabilised Approach

Further Reading

FAA AC 150/5220-22A Engineered Materials Arresting Systems (EMAS) for aircraft overruns (2005)
FAA Report “Soft Ground Arresting Systems for Airports” DOT/FAA/CT-93/80 (1993)