LJ35, Aberdeen SD USA, 1999











  LJ35, Aberdeen SD USA, 1999









Summary

On 25 October 1999, a Learjet 35, being operated on a passenger charter flight by Sunjet Aviation, crashed in South Dakota following loss of control attributed to crew incapacitation.




Event Details

When

25/10/1999



Event Type


HF




Day/Night

Day



Flight Conditions

VMC







Flight Details

Aircraft


 

GATES LEARJET Learjet 35









Operator

Sunjet Aviation



Type of Flight

Public Transport (Passenger)



Flight Origin




Orlando International







Intended Destination




Dallas-Fort Worth International Airport







Take-off Commenced

Yes



Flight Airborne

Yes



Flight Completed

No



Phase of Flight

Climb








Location

Approx.

near Aberdeen, South Dakota










General

Tag(s)


              Inadequate Airworthiness Procedures,
              Inadequate Aircraft Operator Procedures,
              Ineffective Regulatory Oversight,
              Root Cause Not Determined
          




HF

Tag(s)


              Inappropriate crew response (technical fault),
              Flight Crew Incapacitation
          




AW

System(s)


              Air Conditioning and Pressurisation
          



Contributor(s)


              Inadequate QRH Drills,
              Pilot verbal-only defect communication
          




Outcome

Damage or injury

Yes



Aircraft damage

Hull loss



Non-aircraft damage

No



Non-occupant Casualties

No



Occupant Injuries

None



Occupant Fatalities

Most or all occupants



Off Airport Landing

No



Ditching

No




Causal Factor Group(s)

Group(s)

Aircraft Operation
Aircraft Technical




Safety Recommendation(s)

Group(s)

None Made




Investigation Type

Type

Independent









Description
On 25 October 1999, a Learjet 35, being operated on a passenger charter flight by Sunjet Aviation from Orlando to Dallas Fort Worth, crashed in South Dakota following loss of control attributed to crew incapacitation following insufficient oxygen intake after an apparent failure of the pressurisation during the climb.
Synopsis
This is the summary from the official report into the accident published by the National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) (USA).
"On October 25, 1999, about 1213 central daylight time (CDT), a Learjet Model 35, N47BA, operated by Sunjet Aviation, Inc., of Sanford, Florida, crashed near Aberdeen, South Dakota. The airplane departed Orlando, Florida, for Dallas, Texas, about 0920 eastern daylight time (EDT). Radio contact with the flight was lost north of Gainesville, Florida, after air traffic control (ATC) cleared the airplane to flight level (FL) 390. The airplane was intercepted by several U.S. Air Force (USAF) and Air National Guard (ANG) aircraft as it proceeded northwestbound. The military pilots in a position to observe the accident airplane at close range stated (in interviews or via radio transmissions) that the forward windshields of the Learjet seemed to be frosted or covered with condensation. The military pilots could not see into the cabin. They did not observe any structural anomaly or other unusual condition. The military pilots observed the airplane depart controlled flight and spiral to the ground, impacting an open field. All occupants on board the airplane (the captain, first officer, and four passengers) were killed, and the airplane was destroyed."
The probable cause of the accident was given as:
"The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause of this accident was incapacitation of the flight crewmembers as a result of their failure to receive supplemental oxygen following a loss of cabin pressurization, for undetermined reasons."
Related Articles

Human Performance
Loss of Cabin Pressurisation
Hypoxia
Helios 522: Crew Incapacitation

Further Reading

NTSB Accident Report AAB-01-01, Crash of Sunjet Aviation, Learjet Model 35, N47BA, Aberdeen, South Dakota, October 25, 1999