Industry Day - November 2016











  Industry Day - November 2016









Article Information

Category:



SM ICG Safety Management Products 








Content source:




 SM ICG





 









Content control:




 SM ICG





 















SM ICG Holds Ninth Industry Day Outreach Event in Miami
For the ninth time, the Safety Management International Collaboration Group (SM ICG), a group of 18 aviation regulatory bodies, held its ninth semi-annual Industry Day event with representatives from 24 United States (U.S.) aviation industry organizations on November 15, 2016 in Miami, Florida. This event marks the second opportunity for U.S. aviation service providers to hear directly from authorities that are working together and for those authorities to receive feedback on SM ICG products. The full day session, hosted by the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA), included eight industry presentations and an open discussion on Safety Management System (SMS) implementation in the U.S.
The SM ICG was established in 2009 to promote a common understanding of safety management principles and requirements, facilitating their application across the international aviation community. Since its formation, the group has published 22 products and several have been translated into French, German, Portuguese, and Spanish. In recent years, the SM ICG has increased outreach to the greater international aviation community. The inaugural Industry Day event was held in Ottawa, Canada in 2012 with subsequent events held in The Hague, Netherlands, Seattle, Washington, USA, Bern, Switzerland, and Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, Cologne, Germany, Vancouver, Canada, and Rome, Italy.
Steven Gottlieb, Acting Director, Accident Investigation and Prevention at the FAA, welcomed industry participants, "I am interested to hear how SM ICG products influence your work. I am grateful to be here to share lessons learned and to hear from you.” After opening remarks, Don Arendt, Senior Technical Advisor for Safety Management in the FAA Flight Standards Service, and Mike Reinert, System Performance and Development Branch Manager in the FAA Aircraft Certification Service, provided an overview of SMS rulemaking and voluntary implementation programs in the U.S. Eight industry representatives (Callie Choat, American Airlines; Ed Stockhausen, Metro Aviation Inc.; Armando Martinez, Miami Air; Russ Lawton, Air Charter Safety Foundation (ACSF); Maggie Geraghty, FAA Air Traffic Organization (ATO); Doug Biggs, Boeing; Scott Harris, Bell Helicopter Textron; and David Chapel, GE Aviation) presented their experiences with SMS implementation. Those Industry Day speaker biographies and presentations are available for download at the bottom of this page.
Industry Day participants discussed SMS implementation in their organizations. Topics included: managing risk during large organizational changes, building/enhancing SMS in part 135 organizations through voluntary programs, the importance of getting involved in the regulator's rulemaking process, SMS in design and manufacturing organizations, the role of QMS, integrated safety management, safety dashboards for management, and how to achieve a positive safety culture.
Dennis Ofstedahl, Manager of SMS and Internal Evaluation Program (IEP) at Endeavor Air enthusiastically praised SM ICG products, “We really, really appreciate the work you have done. As we developed our SMS, we have had information from the FAA and we have used SM ICG material. You have developed really solid stuff and it has help us a lot at Endeavor Air.”
On behalf of SM ICG Chair Rosalie Kamp, Civil Aviation Safety Inspector in Technical Program and Evaluation at Transport Canada, Amer Younossi, Deputy Division Manager, Safety Management and Research Planning Division at the FAA, thanked industry participants, concluding "This group started when we recognized that U.S. industry was concerned about having to meet multiple sets of SMS requirements in order to operate in different countries. We decided to start collaborating with other aviation authorities. Participation is voluntary; everyone in this group wants to contribute and we believe it is the right thing to do for our countries and for the global aviation community. Thank you for sharing your experience with us today. We welcome your feedback so that our products will be useful to the global aviation community."
Briefing Abstracts and Industry Presenter Biographies
Callie Choat
Managing Director Corporate Safety, Safety Assurance & Regulatory Compliance, American Airlines Safety Management Systems: The Future through History - SMS Development & Integration Abstract:  Learn how American Airlines and US Airways used Safety Management Systems (SMS) as the infrastructure and roadmap to manage risk and mitigations during integration and move safety beyond compliance towards a positive safety culture. Bio:  Callie Choat has been with American Airlines for 10 years and is currently Managing Director Corporate Safety, Safety Assurance & Regulatory Compliance. Prior to joining American Airlines Callie was Senior Director of System Operations Control for Spirit Airlines. Callie has been involved with SMS since 2007 and has worked closely with the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) in development of SMS. Callie is a licensed dispatcher and attended Columbia Southern University.
Ed Stockhausen
Director of Safety, Metro Aviation Integration of FAA Voluntary Safety Programs in SMS for On Demand Part 135 Helicopter Operations Abstract:  While the FAA voluntary safety programs were not specifically designed for Part 135 operations, they can be a successful part of a fully integrated SMS for non-121 operators. Several larger part 135 helicopter operators have used these programs to help mature their Safety Management Systems and provide a more robust framework for managing risk. The format of these programs may look somewhat different, but can be managed according to the type and needs of the operation. The data collected and the visibility into the operation provides managers with additional tools for making solid risk based decisions. Bio:  Ed Stockhausen joined the Metro Aviation team in 2015 as the Director of Safety. Ed began his career in 1977 as a Crew Chief and Load Master for the U.S. Army Parachute Team, The Golden Knights. He has spent the last few decades diversifying his experience in a variety of leadership roles and contributing to the safety of the industry as a whole, including positions as Check Airman, Chief Pilot, Director of Operations, and a single ship part 135 certificate operator/owner. Since 2005, Ed has served as the Vice President of Safety for Air Methods, where he was instrumental in achieving SMS Level IV of the FAA’s SMS Pilot Project. He is well known around the air medical and safety community, serving as the Safety Committee Chairman for the Air Medical Operators Association and serving as a member of the Helicopter Association International (HAI) Safety Committee. He has also developed and presented courses for the Association of Air Medical Services and published several safety articles in professional trade magazines.
Armando Martinez
Senior Director of Safety and Security, Miami Air Part of the Solution Abstract:  I will be discussing Miami Air’s positive experience when working together with the FAA Administrator in various rules and Advisory Circulars, such as SMS Part 5 and Operations Specification A025. I will be discussing how the philosophy of Safety Management Systems has been helpful in this coordination. However, moving forward, if government entities are serious about increasing the effectiveness of the rules they create, they also need to do a better job in communicating and interfacing with other government agencies. I will provide examples of how difficult it is for the industry when government agencies do not talk to each other, hence the point of the presentation that government agencies need to be more effective as part of the solution to efficient rulemaking. Bio: Mr. Martinez graduated from Miami-Dade Community College with an Associates of Arts Degree in Aviation in 1968. Following graduation, Mr. Martinez flew with several cargo companies located in Miami, Florida. In 1971, he co-founded Miami Air Lease with a DC-3 aircraft, later incorporating C-46 and DC-6 aircraft. While there, he earned his Airline Transport Pilot Certificate and Airframe and/or Powerplant (A&P) license. In 1986, he sold his shares in that company and pursued his love of flying with various airlines. He flew various types of aircraft, including Boeing 707, and acquired type-ratings on the DC-3, C-46, DC-6, ATR-42, Boeing 727 and 747 —Accumulating over 12,000 hours of Pilot in Command and over 17,000 hours Total Time in 40 years of flying. In July 2001, he joined Falcon Air Express as Chief Pilot. Subsequently he was promoted to the position of Director of Operations. In 2006 Falcon Air Express declared bankruptcy. He was then assigned by the bankruptcy court as Chief Operating Officer. The company was subsequently sold and as Director of Operations, he helped guide the company back to profitability. In August 2008, he was offered and accepted a position with Miami Air International, Inc. In January of 2009, he became Director of Safety and was put in charge of the development and implementation of the SMS program. In November of 2012 he was promoted to Senior Director of Safety and Security. In May of 2013, Miami Air successfully completed the requirements to exit SMS Level 3. This means Miami Air has completed all implementation phases of SMS —the first US Part 121 Supplemental Air Carrier to do so.
Russ Lawton
Director of Safety/Aviation Safety Action Program (ASAP) Program Manager, Air Charter Safety Foundation SMS Implementation: Part 135 s Abstract:  This presentation will review the efforts of the Air Charter Safety Foundation (ACSF) to encourage the on-demand air charter industry to implement and evaluate SMS through the ACSF Industry Audit Standard. The presentation will also review how participation in the Aviation Safety Action Program (ASAP) can be used to support a company’s SMS and enhance company safety culture. Bio: Russell Lawton is Director of Safety, and Aviation Safety Action Program (ASAP) Manager for the Air Charter Safety Foundation. He is responsible for the Air Charter Safety Foundation’s ASAP program for participating FAA Regulation (FAR) 91 and 135 companies, as well as the ACSF Industry Audit Standard for charter operators and fractional aircraft ownership companies. He is also responsible for developing and implementing SMS programs for member companies of the National Air Transportation Association (NATA), and has served on the FAA SMS Aviation Rulemaking Committee. Lawton has held key safety roles during 38 years in aviation and system safety. Prior to joining the Air Charter Safety Foundation, he served as Director of Operations at Wyvern Consulting and was Wyvern’s lead safety auditor. He was in the first group of accredited auditors for the International Standard for Business Aircraft Operations (IS-BAO). He has assisted the National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) and the FAA on various safety initiatives. He has served as an active member of the National Business Aviation Association (NBAA) Safety Committee for more than 12 years. He has also served as editorial consultant to the Flight Safety Foundation and Editor-in-Chief of IFR Refresher Magazine. Lawton holds a master’s degree in safety from the University of Southern California and a bachelor’s degree in air commerce from the Florida Institute of Technology. Lawton is an active Airline Transport Pilot (ATP) and flight instructor.
Maggie Geraghty
Air Traffic Organization (ATO) Safety Manager, FAA ATO ATO Safety Management System: Yesterday, Today and Tomorrow Abstract:  The FAA Air Traffic Organization’s (ATO) Safety Management System (SMS) continues to mature as the organization’s data and processes are enhanced. Our ability to analyze operational incidents coupled with our continued advancements in the identification of causal and contributing factors, improves the ATO’s ability to better identify hazards and define risk mitigation strategies. These key data points and risk indicators are used to populate the ATO’s operational and statistical risk models to further support verification of an achieved target level of safety. Bio: Maggie Geraghty has worked with the Air Traffic Organization’s (ATO) Safety Management System (SMS) in one capacity or another for over 10 years. Ms. Geraghty now leads the ATO’s Safety Management Group. She is responsible for ensuring the maturation of the ATO’s safety management while improving operational safety performance through enhancing safety policy and training; managing the national safety risk management program; and monitoring the safety performance for the top risks in the National Airspace System (NAS). As such, Ms. Geraghty is responsible for the employment of SMS for more than 35,000 controllers, technicians, engineers, and support workers. Prior to accepting the role as the ATO’s Safety Manager, Ms. Geraghty was the second Civil Air Navigation Services Organization’s (CANSO) Global Safety Manager from January 2012 through June 2014. In this light, Ms. Geraghty managed the CANSO’s global safety program through collaboration across the aviation industry and the globe. Ms. Geraghty’s work across the globe remained broad; however, she provided effective guidance through her continued focus on regional specific issues while continuing to drive global practices and strategies with global industry partners.
Doug Biggs
Deputy Chief Engineer, Product Safety, Boeing Commercial Airplanes, Boeing A US Service Provider’s Perspective on Early Implementation of Safety Management Systems for Design and Manufacturing Abstract:  The Boeing Company has been actively engaged with Industry and Regulators in the development of the framework for, as well as the practical implementation of, SMS since early 2006. As an early SMS implementer, the Boeing efforts have necessarily been conducted in parallel with the maturation of the ICAO guidance material for SMS as well as the FAA development of a US State policy governing SMS requirements for Design and Manufacturing (D&M) Service Providers. Being a pathfinder in the development and execution of an effective D&M SMS has sometimes been complicated by the continued evolution of available guidance material and tools associated with a young and maturing SMS framework. Despite these complications, the journey has produced some valuable learnings, as well as benefits that justify the effort expended. Bio: Doug Biggs studied electrical engineering at the University of Portland, where he received his Bachelor of Science degree in 1983. After early career experiences as a Reliability Engineer, he joined the McDonnell Douglas Company in 1989 where he managed the safety effort for the SPACEHAB program, representing one of the first commercially funded manned space endeavors in history. Doug provided Integration and Operations leadership, including vehicle and payload Safety management, for a string of successful SPACEHAB missions over the next 12 years, during which time McDonnell Douglas merged with the Boeing Company. In 2005, Doug made a career transition from supporting NASA manned space programs to Boeing Commercial Airplanes (BCA), where a highlight has been management of the safety activities for the design and entry into service of the 787 airplane. Doug has been an active part of the Boeing Company involvement in SMS since early 2006, and he continues to be a driving force in the implementation of the Boeing Commercial Airplanes Design and Manufacturing SMS.
Scott Harris
Manager, Safety Management Systems, Bell Helicopter Textron Bell Helicopter Safety Management System Implementation Abstract:  The presentation will provide an overview, from an Original Equipment Manufacturer’s (OEM) perspective, of the safety management system framework being implemented at Bell Helicopter, as part of the FAA’s voluntary implementation program. Bell is a complex organization, with North American facilities across the United States, Canada and Mexico, and international facilities in Europe and Asia. The discussion will include the role of the System Description as a means to scope and manage the SMS, with additional focus on the methods that Bell has chosen to both conduct internal gap analysis and to meet international standards, as well as a discussion of the tools that have been selected to help manage the SMS. Bio: Scott Harris graduated from the University of New Mexico with a Bachelor of Science degree in Mechanical Engineering. After working in the Weapons Programs Division at the Department of Energy, he joined Bell Helicopter in 1986. Harris began his 30-year career at Bell working on the V-22 Full Scale Development program, and remained with the V-22 program through the early production phase in 2005. Since leaving the V-22 program, he has held several positions at Bell, including Manager of Research and Development, Program Management, and was Director of Engineering at Bell India, where he built an engineering team of 150. After implementing a Failure Reporting, Analysis, and Corrective Action System (FRACAS) process at Bell, he was asked to guide the implementation of both an Aviation SMS, and a Design & Manufacturing SMS for the company. He serves on the D&M SMS Industry Working Group that developed National Aerospace Standard (NAS) 9927. He is a certified Six Sigma Black Belt. In his current position, Scott is responsible for the planning, development, and day-to-day management of Bell Helicopter’s Safety Management Systems.
David Chapel
Flight Safety Director, GE Aviation Aerospace Industries Association (AIA) National Aerospace Standard (NAS) Development and GE Aviation’s Associated Gap Analysis Abstract:  Industry groups Aerospace Industries Association (AIA) and General Aviation Manufacturers Association (GAMA) launched an effort to establish a NAS for SMS based on FAR Part 5 in January 2016. The NAS was released in June 2016 through AIA. This presentation will review some of the key concepts discussed during development, such as scope, applicability, and organizational considerations. In addition, with the release of the standard, GE Aviation has conducted a gap analysis of its active, voluntary SMS and will discuss these preliminary findings and conclusions. Bio: Dave is currently responsible for the Flight Safety group at GE Aviation. Dave’s group manages all the accident investigations for GE Aviation products for all market segments including Military, Commercial, and Business and General Aviation (B&GA). In addition, his group is driving the rollout and promotion of GE’s D&M SMS. Dave’s group most recently has added the Maintainability organization to compliment ongoing efforts to work with OEMs and Operators on Human Factors issues related to engine installation, operation, and maintenance. Before GE, Dave worked at Gulfstream Aerospace where he had progressive leadership roles in Flight Sciences working on new product development. Dave has also worked for AlliedSignal / Honeywell Engines where he participated in 25 on-scene accident investigations.
 
Download Presentations

Full Industry Day Article
Briefing Abstracts and Presenter Biographies
Industry Day Participant List
Safety Management Systems: The Future through History - SMS Development & Integration by Callie Choat (American Airlines)
Integration of FAA Voluntary Safety Programs in SMS for On Demand Part 135 Helicopter Operations by Ed Stockhausen (Metro Aviation) - Presentation Unavailable
Part of the Solution by Armando Martinez (Miami Air)
SMS Implementation: Part 135 by Russ Lawton (Air Charter Safety Foundation)
ATO Safety Management System: Yesterday, Today and Tomorrow by Maggie Geraghty (FAA Air Traffic Organization (ATO))
A US Service Provider’s Perspective on Early Implementation of Safety Management Systems for Design and Manufacturing by Doug Biggs (Boeing) - Presentation Unavailable
Bell Helicopter Safety Management System Implementation by Scott Harris (Bell Helicopter Textron)
Aerospace Industries Association (AIA) National Aerospace Standard (NAS) Development and GE Aviation’s Associated Gap Analysis by David Chapel (GE Aviation) - Presentation Unavailable

Industry Day Event Archive
The Safety Management Systems International Collaboration Group (SM ICG), a group of 18 aviation regulatory bodies, was established in 2009. Since its formation, the group has produced several products and has begun to focus more on outreach to the greater international aviation community. To that end, the SM ICG has begun holding Industry Day events during its semi-annual meetings. Read more about other SM ICG Industry Day events




Categories


SM ICG Safety Management Products












Feedback