Just Culture and Media



This page contains Just Culture related cases, which were published on news media websites. The content of this page is split in 4 categories, as it follows:
Aviation


Shoreham: Accessing AAIB Evidence, Criminalisation And Just Culture


The High Court’s imminent decision on whether to grant the police access to confidential AAIB records reignites the debate about ‘just culture’ and criminalisation in air accident investigations.

A win for flight safety

BALPA 's involvement in the Shoreham  case.

Just Culture: Who Are We Really Afraid Of?

When we think about just culture, we usually think about accidents and incidents, associated ‘honest mistakes’ and ‘negligence’, as well as official responses to these, at company and judicial level.

How Aviation Improves Medical Safety

The human brain is fallible. In emergency situations it can be easily overloaded with information or be unable to override social rules of hierarchy and deference. This can have disastrous consequences, particularly in scenarios like aeroplane failures or surgical emergencies.

What Is A Just Culture?

EU Regulation 376/2014 requires aviation organisations in the European Union to adopt and maintain a proactive, evidence-based Just Culture.

Just Culture Video- Because We Are All Humans

ATM safety is at the heart of what we do.Improving safety implies learning from accidents or incidents so as to take appropriate action to prevent repeating them.
Healthcare

A Senior Doctor At A Private Hospital In North-West London Has Been Jailed For Two-And-A-Half-Years For Killing A Patient

James Hughes, 66, died in 2010 at the Clementine Churchill Hospital in Harrow, having suffered a perforated bowel after a routine knee replacement. Sellu ignored his condition and carried on with his clinic, the court heard.

David Sellu Trial: 'Serious Errors' Caused Patient's Death

A patient died because of "serious errors in judgment" by a senior doctor at a private hospital in north-west London, the Old Bailey has heard.

A Surgeon Who Was Jailed Over A Patient's Death At A Private Hospital In North-West London Has Won An Appeal Against His Conviction.

David Sellu, 69, was handed a two-and-a-half-year prison term after being convicted of manslaughter by gross negligence in November 2013.

A Surgeon Who Had His Manslaughter Conviction Quashed Says "Justice Has Not Been Done" For The Patient's Family

James Hughes, 66 (patient), was under Mr Sellu's (surgeon) care when he died at the Clementine Churchill Hospital in Harrow in 2010. David Sellu, 69, served 15 months of a two-and-a-half-year prison term for manslaughter by gross negligence.

Meet The NHS Whistle-Blowers Who Exposed The Truth

As Sir Robert Francis prepares to publish the first independent review of the treatment of whistle-blowers in the NHS, we look at some of those whose disturbing experiences led to the review.

Dear Sir Robert Francis, Your Report on NHS Whistleblowers Is Not Enough – We Need Action On How These Brave Professionals Can Be Helped

NHS whistleblower Dr David Drew writes an open letter to Sir Robert Francis, whose report on whistleblowing was published.

NHS Whistleblower:There's No Protection For Those Who Have Already Spoken Out

A landmark report into NHS whistleblowing failed to help medics who have already suffered for speaking out, and sends out "exactly the wrong message", a prominent whistleblower has claimed.

Whistleblowing Inquiry Lays Bare 'Alarming' Treatment Of Staff Who Speak Out

Government pledges to change employment laws so NHS whistleblowers are not discriminated against, in response to report from Sir Robert Francis QC, but safety campaigners say plans to do not go far enough.

Who's Keeping A Lid On "Priceless" Whistleblower Information In Our Health System - And Why?

NHS and social care watchdog the CQC appears to be ignoring or even suppressing information from whistleblowers - and failing to protect staff who speak out.

Call For More NHS Death Prosecutions

More Scottish health boards should be prosecuted when preventable deaths occur or patients are harmed, the parents of a girl who died as a result of health board failings have said.

Dr. Peter Pisters And Fellow UHN Leaders Speak Candidly About Their Medical Errors

In candid and sometimes painful detail, UHN President and CEO, Dr. Peter Pisters, Chief Medical Officer Dr. Charlie Chan, and Dr. Joy Richards, VP Patient Experience & Chief Health Professions, discuss a moment in their career they will never forget.

Video- Safety Investigation

Witnesses: Dr Steve Shorrock, European Safety Culture, Programme Leader, and Scott Morrish, father of late Sam Morrish and Member of Healthcare Safety Investigation Branch Expert Advisory Group.

Who Dares Confront Jeremy Hunt, NHS Bully-In-Chief?

The climate of fear is created by the health secretary. It’s no wonder doctors and other frontline staff increasingly feel like quitting.

Raj Mattu Case: Sacked Doctor Gets £1.22m In Damages

A heart surgeon who was dismissed from a hospital after exposing concerns about patient safety has been awarded £1.22m in damages.

Dismissed NHS Whistleblower Who Exposed Safety Concerns Handed £1.22m

An employment tribunal has found cardiologist Raj Mattu was unfairly dismissed in 2010 after raising concerns about patient safety.

Manslaughter By Doctors

"On these pages I discuss the clinical law on which our nursing and medical staff rely when caring for our patients" ,Mr Robert Wheeler, director, department of clinical law.

Doctor Errol Cornish Due In Court After Death During Caesarean Of West Malling Teacher Frances Cappuccini At Pembury Hospital

The trial has started of a doctor who has denied manslaughter by gross negligence following the death of a popular primary school teacher during childbirth.

Breast Surgeon Pleads Not Guilty To Maliciously Wounding Patients

A breast surgeon has pleaded not guilty to 20 counts of unlawfully & maliciously wounding patients with the intent to do grievous bodily harm.

‘We Never Thought He Wouldn’t Come Home’: Why Did Our Son, Connor Sparrowhawk, die?

Last year it was revealed that the NHS had failed to investigate an astonishing number of ‘unexpected deaths’: more than 700 within a single trust. Sara Ryan’s son was one of those overlooked.

London Nurse Who Killed Patient By Giving Him Wrong Blood Type In Transfusion Is Convicted

A London nurse made a series of mistakes which led to the death of as patient, being given type AB blood during a transfusion, instead of 0 group.

Walsall Manor Hospital Sacks Four Staff After Death Of Man

A West Midlands hospital has sacked four members of staff, after the death of a man who collapsed outside its accident and emergency department.

Shrewsbury Maternity Trust Could Be Prosecuted for Corporate Manslaughter

Police are considering bringing corporate manslaughter charges against the Shrewsbury and Telford Hospital Trust in UK. An interim report into the trust revealed ​a catalogue of clinical failures which listed the deaths of dozens of babies and mothers as well as more than 50 children who were left permanently disabled.
Rail

Santiago Train Crash: Human Error Over Decades, Not Just Seconds

A train crash at 200 km/h, in the Spanish region of Galicia- this terrible accident has its roots in a period when all of Spain bought into oversized dreams of fast money and fast trains.

Spain Train Crash Driver Admits Speeding In Emergency Call Recording

A recording of a phone call made by the driver of a train that derailed in northern Spain, killing 79 people, in the immediate aftermath of the accident has emerged.

Spain Train Crash: Driver Told Judge He Was "Distracted"

The driver of the train that sped off the rails outside the northern city of Santiago de Compostela, killing 79 passengers, admitted to a judge that he had been "distracted" while at the controls.

Spain Train Crash:Driver Facing 80 Homicide Charges, But Rail Bosses Cleared

The driver of a train that crashed in northern Spain in 2013, killing 80 people, is set to be the only person to face criminal charges over the accident, prosecutors have announced.

Driver In Fatal Santiago Train Crash Faces Up To 4 Years In Prison

Public prosecutors on Tuesday called for a four-year jail term for the train driver involved in one of Spain's worst rail disasters, in which 80 people died in 2013.

How Responsible Can Individual Staff Be Made For The Occurrence Of An Accident?

It is well known that rail accidents always have a chain of interlinked precursor issues; it is never only one person who is completely responsible. Following publication of the CIAF report on the Santiago de Compostela high-speed derailment in Spain – which blamed driver Garzón Amo in full for the accident – a number of people expressed unease with the conclusion reached.

Philadelphia Amtrak Crash: Driver Faces Criminal Charges

Pennsylvania has filed criminal charges against the driver of an Amtrak train which derailed in 2015 in Philadelphia.
Maritime

Cruel Sea

The Spanish government calls him a criminal and won't let him leave the country. But tomorrow Apostolos Mangouras, captain of the Prestige, which sank off the coast of Spain in 2002 spilling tonnes of oil, could be named seaman of the year. What's going on?

Spain Prestige Oil Spill Disaster Case In Court

The trial has begun in northern Spain of the captain of the Prestige oil tanker that sank in 2002, causing the country's worst environmental disaster.

Spanish Court Sentences Captain Of Sunken Prestige Oil Tanker To Prison

Spain's Supreme Court sentenced the captain of the Prestige oil tanker, which sank off Spain's northwestern coast in 2002, covering thousands of kilometres of coastline in fuel oil, to two years in prison on tuesday,january 2016.

Spain Seeks To Overturn Acquittals In Prestige Oil Tanker Spill Disaster

Spain's state prosecutor asked the Supreme Court to overturn a lower court's decision to acquit three men over the 2002 Prestige tanker spill, one of Europe's worst environmental disasters.

Captain Acquitted Of Central Charge 11 Years After Massive Oil Spill

An oil tanker captain was acquitted of the central charge in what's widely considered Spain's worst environmental disaster -- a spill that blackened hundreds of miles of coastline.

Should Pilots And Captains Be Prosecuted For Plane Crashes And Shipwrecks?

The trial of Capt. Francesco Schettino has resumed in Italy, in a Tuscan theater not far from where, last year, he allegedly wrecked the Costa Concordia cruise ship through gross negligence and incompetence, killing 32 people and injuring many more. The trial raises an interesting question: When, if ever, should “pilot error” be considered a crime?

His Ship Still Aground, Captain Goes on Trial

The Costa Concordia last week. A risky effort to right the ship, which capsized off the Tuscan coast last year, is set for September. One Italian official wants it delayed. Residents say the wreck has crushed the local economy.

Costa Concordia Captain's Appeal Rejected

Florence’s appeals court has upheld the 16-year jail term for Francesco Schettino, the captain of the cruise ship, which sank off Italy in 2012 leaving 32 people dead.

Costa Concordia Captain Francesco Schettino Guilty Of Manslaughter

The captain of the Costa Concordia, the cruise ship that ran aground off the coast of Italy in 2012 killing 32 people, has been found guilty of manslaughter.

Costa Concordia: Cruise Captain Francesco Schettino Blames Others For Shipwreck As Appeal Begins

Disgraced skipper Francesco Schettino has begun his battle to avoid prison for a 2012 cruise ship disaster off Italy in which 32 people died, with his lawyers arguing that others should take the blame.

Over Red, The Failure Of U.S. Navy Leadership

“You gotta challenge all assumptions. If you don’t, what is doctrine on day one becomes dogma forever after.” Colonel John Boyd, USAF

How the X-Pearl Disaster Could Have Been Avoided
Damning report emerges of the pilots onboard the Ever Given






 













Just Culture Navigation



Main category page


Just Culture in Aviation


Just Culture in Healthcare


Just Culture in Maritime


Just Culture in Rail





Related resources




Human Error in Aviation and Legal Process
Safety and Justice Toolkit