Regulation 677/2011 Detailed Rules for the Implementation of ATM Network Functions











  Regulation 677/2011 Detailed Rules for the Implementation of ATM Network Functions









Article Information

Category:



Single European Sky 








Content source:




 SKYbrary





 









Content control:




 EUROCONTROL





 















Note: This Regulation was repealed by Regulation 2019/123 and is no longer in force.
Commission Regulation (EU) No 677/2011 of 7 July 2011 laying down detailed rules for the implementation of air traffic management (ATM) network functions and amending Regulation (EU) No 691/2010 – text published in the Official Journal of the European Union.
Objective and Scope
This Regulation defines detailed rules for the implementation of air traffic management (ATM) network functions in Europe in order to allow optimum use of airspace in the SES area and ensure that airspace users can operate preferred trajectories, while allowing maximum access to airspaces and air navigation services.
The Regulation applies to Member States, European Aviation Safety Agency, airspace users, air navigation service providers, airport operators, airport slot coordinators and operating organisations, at national or functional airspace block (FAB) level.
Summary
Establishment of Network Manager
According to the provisions of this Regulation (popular as “Network management implementing rule”) a Network Manager shall be established in Europe to perform the following functions:

the design of the European Route Network;
the coordination of scarce resources, in particular:

radio frequencies within aviation frequency bands used by general air traffic;
SSR transponder codes.



The European Commission may add other functions, too.
The Network Manager (NM) shall be nominated by the European Commission. The length of the term of the NM shall cover two or more reference periods for the performance scheme defined by the now repealed Regulation 691/2010 (the duration of one normal period is 5 years).
On 18 July 2011 the European Commission nominated the EUROCONTROL Agency to take on the role of European Network Manager.
Tasks of the Network Manager
As set out in Article 4 of the Regulation, the Network Manager will:

monitor, report and forecast the performance of the European ATM network based on the agreed performance targets;
act as a central unit for air traffic flow management across Europe;
ensure the European airspace can accommodate the additional capacity needs and seamlessly integrates airports into the network;
provide support for network crisis management by the establishment of a European Aviation Crisis Coordination Cell (EACCC);
give Member States and partners access to common resources, such as tools, processes and consistent data to support the cooperative decision-making process at network level;
support the deployment of technological improvements across the European ATM network.

To fulfil its tasks the NM shall develop, maintain and implement:

a Network Strategy Plan;
a detailed Network Operations Plan;

The information to be provided in the plans is set out in Annexes IV and V of the Regulation.
Relations with other Parties
The Regulations establishes the competences of the NM and its relations with other Parties involved in ATM, notably:

EU Member States;
operational stakeholders, such as aviation service providers;
functional airspace blocks;
national military authorities;
third countries.

Governance and Oversight
The NM will be governed by a Network Management Board that will include representatives of:

air navigation service providers;
commercial and non-commercial civil airspace users;
airport operators;
military authorities;
the European Commission;
EUROCONTROL;
the Network Manager.

Note: The representatives of the Commission, EUROCONTROL and the NM do not have voting rights
The network functions shall be managed through cooperative decision-making enabled by appropriate and regular consultation of the Member States and operational stakeholders.
The European Commission, assisted by EASA in matters related to safety, shall ensure the oversight of the Network Manager. The Commission shall report to the Single Sky Committee annually or when so specifically requested.
The NM shall submit annually a report to the European Commission and EASA on the measures taken to fulfil its tasks. The report shall address individual network functions as well as the total network situation.
Entry into Force
This Regulation enters into force in August 2011 and is directly applicable in all EU Member States.
Note: This Regulation was repealed by Regulation 2019/123 and is no longer in force.
Regulation (EU) No 677/2011 laying down detailed rules for the implementation of ATM network functions - full text.
Related articles

Regulation 390/2013 - Performance Scheme for Air Navigation Services and Network Functions

Further Reading
European Commission

EUR-Lex Portal: Regulation 677/2011 (available in different languages and file formats)
Air Transport Portal of the European Commission - Single European Sky





Categories


Single European Sky,
              SES Implementing Rules












Feedback