Continuing Airworthiness











  Continuing Airworthiness









Article Information

Category:



Airworthiness 








Content source:




 Cranfield University





 









Content control:




 Cranfield University





 















Definition
Continuing Airworthiness management is the process by which an aircraft is kept in a condition where it remains airworthy throughout its life - i.e. technically fit for flight. 
In the words of ICAO:
“All of the processes ensuring that, at any time in its life, an aeroplane complies with the technical conditions fixed to the issue of the Certificate of Airworthiness and is in a condition for safe operation" - source: ICAO Airworthiness Manual [ICAO, 2014]
Description
The ultimate responsibility for continued airworthiness is assigned in ICAO Annex 8 to the State of Design, but the programme to achieve continuing airworthiness is a matter for the State of Registry. It is useful to compare Continued and Continuing as they are sometimes used interchangeably. Continued Airworthiness is also known as Type Airworthiness [MAA, 2016] or Initial Airworthiness [EC, 2014]
Continued Airworthiness = “All the actions associated with the upkeep of a type design and the associated approved data through life.” - Source MAA02 glossary [MAA, 2016]
Continuing Airworthiness = “All of the processes ensuring that, at any time in its operating life, the aircraft complies with the airworthiness requirements in force and is in a condition for safe operation” - Source EC1321/2014 Article 2 [EC, 2014]
Management of Continuing Airworthiness
For operators based in EU nations, and others who choose to follow EASA regulations, a Continuing Airworthiness Management Organisation (CAMO) must be in place. This is an (approved) organisation responsible for implementation of continuing airworthiness management tasks.
According to EU 2018/1139 Annex V Section 6 [EU, 2018], the owner or – if designated by contract - the lessee is responsible for the continuing airworthiness of an aircraft and shall ensure that no flight takes place unless:

The aircraft is maintained in an airworthy condition, and;
Any operational and emergency equipment fitted is correctly installed and serviceable or clearly identified as unserviceable, and;
The airworthiness certificate remains valid, and;
The maintenance of the aircraft is performed in accordance with the approved maintenance programme as specified in Part M.A.302.

Reference should also be made to M.A 201 in EASA Part M [EC, 2014], which gives more detail concerning the responsibilities for continuing airworthiness. For operators based outside the EU, for whom EASA regulations do not apply, continuing airworthiness is still managed in a controlled manner but the regulations are within the rules for the operator. Although the owner bears the legal responsibility for continuing airworthiness, there is very much a shared responsibility between:

The aircraft Type Certificate Holder (TCH) - Designer / Manufacturer
Commercial Air Transport (CAT) Operators
Aircraft Owner
Maintenance Organisation
Authorised Persons e.g. Licensed Aircraft Engineers
Regulators i.e. Airworthiness Authorities

For each of its aircraft, the approved CAMO is required to carry out the following functions. Although these are drawn from EASA Part M, Sub Part G M.A.708 [EC, 2014], the activities would be similar to those required of any operator:

Develop and control a maintenance programme for the aircraft managed including any applicable reliability programme.
Present the aircraft maintenance programme and its amendments to the competent authority for approval.
Manage the approval of modification and repairs.
Ensure that all maintenance is carried out in accordance with the approved maintenance programme and released in accordance with M.A. Subpart H [Certificate of Release to Service (CRS)].
Ensure that all applicable ADs and operational directives with a continuing airworthiness impact, are applied.
Ensure that all defects discovered during scheduled maintenance or reported are corrected by an appropriately approved maintenance organisation.
Ensure that the aircraft is taken to an appropriately approved maintenance organisation whenever necessary.
Coordinate scheduled maintenance, the application of ADs, the replacement of service LLP, and component inspection to ensure the work is carried out properly.
Manage and archive all continuing airworthiness records and/or operator's technical log.
Ensure that the mass and balance statement reflects the current status of the aircraft.

Continuing Airworthiness is therefore not just the maintenance of aircraft and equipment, but also involves monitoring performance of products in service. This will include recording service difficulties to assess significance with respect to safety and airworthiness for the specific aircraft/product involved and for similar aircraft/products. Timely response is required where airworthiness is affected, which means devising and provisioning rectification action, and promulgating the necessary information to restore safety levels.
Inspection methods and intervals, repair actions, modifications, and timescales are all part of Continuing Airworthiness, as are feedback to design/production and formal airworthiness review (or Airworthiness Review Certificate, ARC).
Related Articles

Airworthiness
Airworthiness - The System

Further Reading

For more on concept of Continued Airworthiness, see the Continued Airworthiness leaflet prepared by the International Federation of Airworthiness (IFA) to assist the understanding of the basic Continuing Airworthiness requirements and control functions.
EC (2018), Regulation (EU) 2018/1139 on common rules in the field of civil aviation and establishing a European Aviation Safety Agency.
EC (2014), Commission Regulation (EU) No 1321/2014 of 26 Nov 2014 on the continuing airworthiness of aircraft and aeronautical products, parts and appliances, and on the approval of organisations and personnel involved in these tasks. (external link)
AC 43.13-1B: Acceptable Methods, Techniques, and Practices - Aircraft Inspection and Repair, FAA, September 1998
AC 43.13-2B: Acceptable Methods, Techniques, and Practices - Aircraft Alterations, FAA, March 2008
ICAO (2014), Doc 9760 Airworthiness Manual, 3rd Edition, ICAO.
MAA (2016), MAA02 Military Aviation Authority Master Glossary (external link)
Maintenance Briefing Notes: Maintenance Documentation by Airbus
Maintenance Briefing Notes: Maintenance during aircraft storage by Airbus





Categories


Airworthiness












Feedback