Automatic Emergency Descent System











  Automatic Emergency Descent System









Article Information

Category:



Flight Technical 








Content source:




 SKYbrary





 









Content control:




 SKYbrary





 















Definition
A system which automatically performs an emergency descent to an altitude which does not necessitate supplementary oxygen when the crew does not respond to warnings concerning cabin altitude.
Such systems are under development by major manufacturers and are currently in use in some aircraft types.
Description
An Automatic Emergency Descent System monitors cabin pressure altitude and, if the cabin altitude exceeds a pre-set value, the emergency descent system may direct the autopilot to descend the airplane to minimum safe altitude. The emergency descent system may also communicate with ground facilities informing them of the descent.
The system may initiate the descent if the pilots fail to respond to a cautionary alert - potentially indicating that the crew is incapacitated through the effects of Hypoxia. The system may also initiate if health/alertness monitors indicate that the pilot has lost consciousness.
Should the aircraft's monitoring system detect an unsafe cabin pressure, it will warn the crew via the primary flight display and begin a countdown. If the crew do not act to cancel the warning or take positive control of the aircraft, the aircraft will perform a side-step manoeuvre, taking it to the right of the designated airway to avoid conflict. This sidestep would automatically account for any existing lateral offset selected by the crew. The aircraft will also be put into a rapid descent at maximum operating speed towards FL 100 - the target altitude for depressurisation incidents, at which oxygen masks are no longer necessary. The system may also fly pre-programmed escape routes for those sectors of the route where the minimum safe altitude is above 10,000 ft.
Related Articles

Explosive Depressurisation
Rapid Depressurisation
Gradual Depressurisation
Loss of Cabin Pressurisation
Hypoxia





Categories


Flight Technical












Feedback