ES2 2009(SASI)











  ES2 2009(SASI)









Article Information

Category:



General 








Content source:




 SKYbrary





 









Content control:




 SKYbrary





 















In 2009, five working sessions were organised in the framework of ES2 meetings. The workshops took place in Brussels, Cyprus and Paris and the subjects discussed ranged from Cost of SMS, Safety Assessments, Safety Surveys to Contingency Planning, ending with the CEO's Meeting.
Go back to all editions of ES2 Meetings
Contents

1 WS 01-09
2 WS 02-09
3 WS 03-09
4 WS 04-09
5 WS 05-09

WS 01-09

The central theme of this first working session was "Cost of SMS"; it took place in Brussels and the main objectives for this workshop were to offer participants a wider image of the real costs induced by the development, maintenance and day-to-day operations of Safety Management Systems.
The presentations from this workshop are listed here:

Workshop Agenda
SMS Cost Model Demonstrator
Cost of SMS-Roadmap
Investigation of Safety Occurences
Cost Model for the Development, Maintenance and Day-to-day Operation of a SMS
Cost Model for the Development, Maintenance and Day-to-day Operation of a SMS -Part 2
Venue calculation

WS 02-09
The second working session took place in Brussels, between 11-12 June and its name was "Experience Sharing on Safety Assessments". Safety Assessments are carried out in other high-risk industries and during this session examples from outside ATM were presented. The aim of the working session was to increase knowledge and spread awareness amongst ANSPs, Regulators and Safety Specialists on the practical compliance to ESARR requirements with respect to Safety Assessment.
The agenda and the presentations from the workshop can be found below:

Workshop Agenda
Welcome and Round the Table
Safety Assessment: Burden or an Easy Task?
SASI CBA Exercise Brief
Safety case for SASI CBA -exercise
Generic vs. local Safety Case
ADS-B in NRA Implementation Across Europe
Safety Case for Changes to VFR Operations
Common Safety Methods for Risk Evaluation and Assessment
Example from Another Industry: International Atomic Energy Agency
Draft Safety Plan for ILS at MOSTAR and TUZLA
ILS at MOSTAR and TUZLA Airports
Example Assessment of ILS at BIH from Safety Consideration Session (Sarajevo, May 2009)

WS 03-09

Workshop number 3 took place also in Brussels, between 17-18 of September. The theme of the working session number 3 was "Safety Surveys in ATM SMS" . The workshop focused on increasing awareness of safety surveys, whose aims are to examine procedures or processes related to a specific operation and provide a flexible and cost-effective method to identify areas for safety improvement within the aviation service provider organisation.
The presentations from the workshop are listed below:

What is a Safety Survey?
SMS Survey Protocol
Human Factors in Safety Surveys
Observations from an On-site Coaching Session
Day-to-Day Observations at NATS
NATS Day-to-Day Survey Best Practices
NATS Observer's Handout
Advanced Check- CESATK
Local Safety Survey Application
EUROCONTROL Approach to Safety Culture Surveys
Safety Survey Guidelines - Course Reference Material: General Principles
Safety Survey Course Reference Material: Guidance and Examples

WS 04-09
The fourth workshop from this year was held at Cyprus, between 24-26 November and it was entitled "Contingency Planning of Air Navigation Services". The objectives of the workshop were to determine what was right with the participants'ATM contingency plans and what improvements should they have taken into consideration (if needed).
The list of the materials from this workshop (including some exercises) is below:

Workshop Roadmap
Round Table Discussion and Lessons Learned from SASI 2008
Your Expectations and Definitions of Contingency
Examples of Contingency Planning in ANS by Prof. Chris Johnson
Contingency Planning of ANS: Practical Case - Fire in a Tower by Prof. Chris Johnson
Overview of Contingency and EUROCONTROL Approach
Policy and operational Concept of Contingency Planning
Contingency Policy
Current Practices for Contingency in ATM :SWOT and Strategies
Organisational Aspects and Planning Process
Legal and Regulatory Issues in Contingency Planning
Safety Aspects in Contingency
Outages, Their Consequences and probabilities of Occurrences
Economic Impact on Stakeholders
Building a Business case
Short Overview of the Financial Modelling
Overview of Economic Aspects of Contingency
Achievement, Execution, Assurance and Promotion
Main Brief- ANS Contingency Exercises
Exercise Brief
AKSIA- Exercise Brief
Lutan - Exercise Brief
Exercise Map
Exercise 1- Policy and consultation Process
Exercise 2- Operational Concept Brief
Exercise 3- Planning Brief

WS 05-09
The fifth and the last working session of 2009 was called "SASI CEO's Meeting" and was held at ICAO European and North Atlantic Office in Paris, between 29-30 October. This meeting had the following objective: to present the annual SASI report, to review the 5 years of SASI, to study the cost of SMS, to identify safety KPIs and to look at the Governance Principle of Management Systems.
Have a look at the materials from this meeting:

Working Session Structure
Governance Principles of Management Systems
Maturity Slides
ICAO-EUROCONTROL Partnership
SASI Report 2009 : 5 years and the future
Review of Priorities for 2010
Cost of SMS
SMS Cost Model Demonstration
Venue Calculation Example
Leading and Lagging Safety KPIs - AHP and APF


Go back to all editions of ES2 Meetings




Categories


General












Feedback