Wake Vortex Propagation and Decay











  Wake Vortex Propagation and Decay









Article Information

Category:



Wake Vortex Turbulence 








Content source:




 SKYbrary





 









Content control:




 SKYbrary





 















Vortex Generation
The origin of counter-rotating wing tip vortices is a direct and automatic consequence of the generation of lift by a wing. Lift is generated by the creation of a pressure differential over the wing surface. The lowest pressure occurs over the upper wing surface and the highest pressure under the wing. This pressure differential triggers the roll up of the airflow aft of the wing resulting in swirling air masses trailing downstream of the wing tips. After the roll up is completed, the wake consists of two counter-rotating cylindrical vortices. For further detail, see the separate article: Induced Drag.

Wake Vortex Turbulence
The strength of the vortex is governed by the weight, speed, and shape of the wing of the generating aircraft. The vortex characteristics of any given aircraft can also be changed by extension of flaps or other wing configuring devices as well as by change in speed. However, as the basic factor is weight, the vortex strength increases proportionately.
Vortex Decay
Vortices usually persist for between one and three minutes, with survival often greatest at low level in calm or very light wind conditions and at higher altitudes in thinner air. Once formed, vortices descend until they decay (or reach the ground). Decay is usually rapid and occurs more quickly in windy conditions over land because of the greater variation in both components of wind velocity which are induced by frictional effects of terrain. Cross-winds can carry a vortex away from the flight path which the aircraft generating them has followed.
Contributory Factors

Aircraft weight
Aircraft speed
Aircraft wing configuration (Flap setting etc.)
Closeness to the ground - vortex ceases to be hazardous when ground contact occurs
Wind velocity - light winds delay decay
Turbulence, from sources other than wake vortex, accelerates vortex decay

Further Reading
EASA

Safety Information Bulletin No. 2017-10: En-route Wake Turbulence Encounters, 22 June 2017

FAA

FAA Aeronautical Information Manual, Chapter 7 (Safety of Flight), Section 4, Aircraft Wake Turbulence, 2022
FAA AC 90-23G - Aircraft Wake Turbulence
FAA "Pilot and Air Traffic Controller Guide to Wake Turbulence"
Wake Turbulence Training Aid Navigator, FAA website

UK CAA

Safety Sense Leaflet No 15c - Wake Turbulence
UK AIC P092/2017 - Wake Turbulence

HindSight Articles

Crash Follows Encounter with Boeing 757 Wake Vortex;
Wake Vortex Turbulence - The role of the Air Traffic Controller;

Other

Wake Votrices, C. Lelaie, Airbus Safety First Magazine No. 21, pp. 42-50, January 2016
Airbus FOBN - Wake Turbulence Avoidance
New Zealand Air Force 'Good Aviation Practice' Booklet on Wake Turbulence
Wake Vortex Influence in General Aviation, a BFU note, 2016
Video of practical tests to document the effects of wake vortices on aircraft, by the DLR (external link)





Categories


Wake Vortex Turbulence









Related SKYclip









 Read more




En-route Wake Turbulence (SKYclip)









Related Articles

Induced Drag - provides more information on the origin of tip vortices.
ICAO Wake Turbulence Category
Wake Turbulence Hazard - A Pilot Check List













Feedback