B738, en-route, Colorado Springs CO USA, 2006











  B738, en-route, Colorado Springs CO USA, 2006









Summary

B738 diversion into KCOS following in-flight fire. The fire started after a passenger's air purifier device caught fire whilst in use during the flight. The user received minor burns and the aircraft cabin sustained minor damage.




Event Details

When

15/12/2006



Event Type


FIRE




Day/Night

Night



Flight Conditions

VMC







Flight Details

Aircraft


 

BOEING 737-800









Operator

Continental Airlines



Type of Flight

Public Transport (Passenger)



Flight Origin




Houston/George Bush Intercontinental Airport







Intended Destination




Portland International Airport







Actual Destination




Colorado Springs Airport







Take-off Commenced

Yes



Flight Airborne

Yes



Flight Completed

Yes



Phase of Flight

Cruise








Location

Approx.

near Colorado Springs, CO










FIRE

Tag(s)


              Fire-Cabin Baggage origin
          




CS

Tag(s)


              Hand held extinguisher used,
              Faulty or misused PED
          




Outcome

Damage or injury

Yes



Aircraft damage

Minor



Non-aircraft damage

Yes



Non-occupant Casualties

No



Occupant Injuries

Few occupants



Off Airport Landing

Yes



Ditching

Yes




Safety Recommendation(s)

Group(s)

None Made




Investigation Type

Type

Independent









Description
On 15 December 2006, a Boeing 737-800, being operated by Continental Airlines on a scheduled passenger flight made an emergency en route diversion to Colorado Springs, Colorado, after the cabin crew reported an in-flight fire. The flight had originated at Houston Texas and was en route to Portland, Oregon. Night Visual Meteorological Conditions (VMC) prevailed at the time of the event.
The fire was started after a personal air purifier device, used by a passenger during the flight, exploded. The airplane sustained minor damage. One passenger received a minor burn injury. Six persons were transported to a local hospital. They were treated for smoke inhalation and released.
The Investigation
The device that initiated the fire was sent to National Transportation Safety Board (USA) (NTSB) for analysis.
The device, “According to a sales brochure, it "generates an intense electrostatic ion wind that charges floating particles in the 'breathing zone.' The particles are substantially repelled away from the wearer, creating an almost particle-free 'exclusion zone' for toxic allergens, smoke, dust, viruses, and bacteria. Perfumes and odours can also be minimized by the ion particle-charging-effect."
The Fire and Explosion Specialist's report included the following information:
"The unit originally came with a 3.6V CR123A size non-rechargeable lithium primary battery. A kit containing a charger and a rechargeable lithium-ion battery was also available for this unit."
Further on, the report included data from EDS analysis of the splatter that was found on the device. It showed the presence of manganese - manganese dioxide is a component of primary (non-rechargeable) lithium batteries.
“The specialist's report noted that in testimony given at NTSB public hearings on the hazards associated with primary and secondary lithium batteries, a short circuit was "the most common cause of battery fires. The short circuit can be caused either by design flaws, manufacturing defects or improper packaging and handling. Charging non-rechargeable batteries can result in an internal short that can lead to thermal runaway and battery failure. Batteries are generally not designed to be able to contain catastrophic failures, and when they go into thermal runaway they often explode and expel their contents to the environment potentially causing ignition in areas well beyond the initiating battery cell
Probable Cause
“The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this incident as follows. A short circuit in the primary (non-rechargeable) battery, most likely due to it being recharged. This internal short led to thermal runaway, battery failure, and an explosion.”
Related Articles

Fire Smoke and Fumes
Smoke Gases
Aircraft Fire Risk from Battery-powered Items Carried on Aircraft
Personal Electronic Device Fire - Cabin Crew Checklist
Unidentified Fire On Board (OGHFA SE)

Further Reading

The full NTSB Report (DEN07IA037)