Ionising Radiation Emitted from Thunderstorms











  Ionising Radiation Emitted from Thunderstorms









Article Information

Category:



Weather 








Content source:




 SKYbrary





 









Content control:




 SKYbrary





 















Description
This article provides a brief summary of existing knowledge related to ionising radiation emitted from thunderstorms and the possible health effects on aircraft crew and passengers exposed to this radiation.
Terrestrial Gamma-ray Flashes (TGFs)
Terrestrial gamma-ray flashes (TGFs) are bursts of gamma rays produced in the Earth's atmosphere. TGFs have been recorded to last 0.2 to 3.5 milliseconds, and have energies of up to 20 MeV. It is speculated that TGFs are caused by intense electric fields produced above or inside thunderstorms and are associated with lightning. In both lightning and TGFs, the high-energy emissions are believed to occur when electrons in air travelling at very close to the speed of light collide with the nuclei of air atoms.
Aircraft exposure to TGFs
There are many unknowns, including the occurrence rate of TGFs relative to lightning, the effect of the aircraft triggering the lightning, and the frequency and lengths of electron acceleration regions in thunderstorms. The estimated dose received by an individual in an aircraft struck by TGF or lightning-energetic electrons is about 30 mSv. Thus, a significant number of aircraft occupants may receive a large radiation dose.
Related Articles

Cosmic Radiation
Lightning
Thunderstorm
Cumulonimbus (Cb)
Atmosphere

Further Reading

Ionizing Radiation in Earth’s Atmosphere and in Space Near Earth, Civil Aerospace Medical Institute, FAA, Published May 2011.
Estimation of the influence of high‐energy electron bursts produced by thunderclouds and the resulting radiation doses received in aircraft, Prof. Joseph Dwyer et al, Journal of Geophysical Research, published 15 May 2010.





Categories


Weather,
              Weather Phenomena












Feedback