MD11, en-route, near Cape Ashizuri, Japan, 2007











  MD11, en-route, near Cape Ashizuri, Japan, 2007









Summary

On 10 January 2007, a Transmile Air Services Boeing MD11F First Officer became suddenly incapacitated by seizure during a flight from Anchorage to Hong Kong. A diversion was made and the affected pilot hospitalised where the cause was identified as a previously non-symptomatic brain tumour.




Event Details

When

10/01/2007



Event Type


HF,
              LOC




Day/Night

Day



Flight Conditions

VMC







Flight Details

Aircraft


 

MCDONNELL DOUGLAS MD-11









Operator

Transmile Air Services



Type of Flight

Public Transport (Cargo)



Flight Origin




Anchorage







Intended Destination




Hong Kong International Airport







Actual Destination




Kansai International Airport







Take-off Commenced

Yes



Flight Airborne

Yes



Flight Completed

Yes



Phase of Flight

Cruise








Location








HF

Tag(s)


              Flight Crew Incapacitation
          




EPR

Tag(s)


              “Emergency” declaration
          




Outcome

Damage or injury

No



Aircraft damage

None



Non-aircraft damage

No



Non-occupant Casualties

No



Occupant Injuries

None



Occupant Fatalities

None



Off Airport Landing

No



Ditching

No




Causal Factor Group(s)

Group(s)

Aircraft Operation




Safety Recommendation(s)

Group(s)

None Made




Investigation Type

Type

Independent









Description
On 10 January 2007, the PNF co pilot of a Transmile Air Services Boeing MD11F operating with a First Officer who was designated and operating as(Cruise Captain[1]) became suddenly incapacitated by seizure during a flight from Anchorage to Hong Kong. A diversion was made and the affected pilot hospitalised where the cause was identified as a previously non-symptomatic brain tumour. The incident occurred over the sea at 30 km southwest of Cape Ashizuri, Kochi Prefecture, Japan.
The Investigation
The official Report on the Serious Incident by the Japan Transport Safety Board (JTSB) states:
"When the serious incident took place, Cruise Captain was at the left pilot seat as the Pilot Flying (PF) (crewmember primarily responsible for aircraft control), and SIC (Second in Command) was at the right pilot seat as the Pilot-Not-Flying (PNF) (crewmember primarily responsible for other than control)."
The Report includes the detailed statements of the flight crew, including the statement of Cruise Captain who points out that as the SIC become unconscious he extended his legs on the rudder pedals and the aircraft began yawing left and right. The SIC was later removed from the right seat and medical emergency was declared. The aircraft then diverted to Kansai International Airport, Japan.
Probable Cause
"It is estimated that this serious incident was caused, when the aircraft was cruising, the Second In Command (SIC) in duty of pilot flying became incapable of performing his duty normally by a loss of consciousness, which followed a sudden headache as a symptom of intra cranial hypertension.
Concerning that the appearance of these symptoms was not predicted, it is estimated to contribute the SIC did not have any subjective symptoms of brain tumors, and detecting brain tumors under current aviation medical examinations is difficult if no subjective or objective symptoms are observed."
Note by the SKYbrary editor

^ Cruise Captain in the report refers to a pilot certificated as cruise captain by the Malaysian Aviation Authority, and is qualified by the company to act as PIC during cruise only and who was engaged in the operation of the aircraft.

Related Articles

Loss of Control
Pilot Incapacitation
In-flight Pilot Incapacitation (OGHFA SE)

Further Reading

The full JTSB Report