Emergency Phase in Contingency











  Emergency Phase in Contingency









Article Information

Category:



ANS Contingency Planning







Content source:




 SKYbrary





 









Content control:




 SKYbrary





 















Definition
'Emergency' phase or modes are those situations following unforeseen or sudden catastrophic events that may lead to potentially unsafe situations and/or partial or full interruption of the air navigation services (ANS) provision, therefore prompting an immediate response to contain the adverse impact and, where feasible, initiate recovery actions.
Description
It is recognised, however, that not all situations can be foreseen. In addition, no two situations will be the same and so no emergency or service continuity plan can cater for every eventuality. That said, ANSPs must be prepared for certain common factors. For example, they must be able to deal with unexpected events and it is the ability to respond to these in a safe, orderly manner which provides the overriding rationale for the development of contingency plans. Safety is, and must remain, the number one priority. A system (technical, people and procedures) working in 'Normal' operation can evolve directly into an “emergency” situation; or a system can deteriorate into a “degraded mode of operation” that further evolves into an “emergency” situation.
For 'emergency', 'degraded' modes of operation and ' service continuity', it is important to conduct both a safety assessment and a security risk assessment. The aim is to ensure that the planned contingency measures meet safety and security requirements set at the policy step.
Related Articles

Operational Concept for Contingency
Contingency Lifecycle
Crisis Management
Fail to Safe
Testing and Exercising
Training for Contingency Operations

Further Reading

For further information on Contingency Planning see the EUROCONTROL, Guidelines for Contingency Planning for Air Navigation Services (including Service Continuity). In particular for emergency modes of operation, see Chapter 8 of the guidelines on the Contingency Planning Process: Step 4.


See also the EUROCONTROL Reference Guide to EUROCONTROL Guidelines for Contingency Planning





Categories


ANS Contingency Planning












Feedback