Global Air Navigation Plan (GANP)











  Global Air Navigation Plan (GANP)









Article Information

Category:



General 








Content source:




 SKYbrary





 









Content control:




 SKYbrary





 















Description
The International Civil Aviation Organisation (ICAO) Global Air Navigation Plan (Doc 9750) is ICAO’s highest-level air navigation strategic document. It also serves as the plan to drive the evolution of the global air navigation system in conjunction with the Global Air Traffic Management Operational Concept (Doc 9854) and the Manual on Air Traffic Management System Requirements (Doc 9882). The Global Air Navigation Plan (GANP) also supports planning for local and regional implementation.
The current GANP, the fifth edition, covers the period 2016-2030 and represents “a rolling, 15-year strategic methodology which leverages existing technologies and anticipates future developments based on State/industry agreed operational objectives,” according to ICAO. The work programme contained in the GANP is approved every three years by the ICAO Council
The block upgrades featured in the GANP are organized in non-overlapping six-year time increment starting in 2013 and continuing through 2031 and beyond.
Structure
The content of the GANP is organized into a multilayer structure with each layer tailored to different audiences. This allows for better communication with both high-level and technical managers. The four-layer structure is made up of global (strategic and technical), regional and national levels, and provides a framework for alignment of regional, sub-regional and national plans. The four-layer structure facilitates decision making by providing a stable strategic direction for the evolution of the air navigation system and, at the same time, timely relevance in the technical content.
All four levels of the GANP have been made available in an interactive, web-based platform called the GANP Portal, which ICAO says ensures a common entry point to, and consistency between, the four levels of the GANP.
Further Reading

ICAO Doc 9750-AN/963: Global Air Navigation Plan, 2016-2030, Fifth Edition, 2016.
ICAO Doc 10004: Global Aviation Safety Plan: 2020 - 2022

Related Articles

Global Aviation Safety Plan (GASP)
Global Aviation Safety Road Map





Categories


General












Feedback