Pandemics











  Pandemics









Article Information

Category:



Aeromedical 








Content source:




 SKYbrary





 









Content control:




 SKYbrary





 















COVID-19 information available here.
Definition
Pandemics describe epidemics, or an outbreak of an infectious disease, that spreads through the populations across a large region or worldwide. They are significant for contingency operations when both operational and technical staff may either be infected or may be called upon to care for their families and friends.
Description
Contingency planning for ANS also needs to be re-evaluated in the context of recent world events ranging from security threats to possible pandemics. Pandemics create particular problems for any plans that involve the movement of staff. It is often necessary to isolate groups of co-workers to help minimise the risks of transmitting the disease. Moving staff from an air traffic control facility that had already suffered an outbreak might well endanger the health of workers at an ‘aiding’ unit. Hence, shared regional solutions and centralised facilities that require staff to move from an affected centre would not provide ideal solutions to pandemic contingencies.
There are fears that an animal influenza virus might combine with a human influenza virus (in a bird, pig or a human) to create a sub-type that was both highly contagious and highly lethal in humans. At present the influenza strain remains very inefficient in terms of human to human transmission. Concerns over the potential threats posed by Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome (SARS), H1N1 (Swine flu) and H5N1 (Avian influenza) have prompted several ANSPs to develop specialist plans for dealing with pandemics. These plans are, typically, structured around the WHO Pandemic phases.
Related Articles

Crisis Management
Policy on Contingency
Operational Concept for Contingency
Service Continuity
Public Health and Aviation
Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19)

Further Reading

For further information on Contingency Planning see the EUROCONTROL, Guidelines for Contingency Planning for Air Navigation Services (including Service Continuity). Coverage of Pandemics is contained in Appendix I on ‘Special Cases’ page 155.


See also the EUROCONTROL Reference Guide to EUROCONTROL Guidelines for Contingency Planning
Pandemic: Non-Medical Operational Safety Aspects, Supplemental Materials, Flight Safety Foundation, 27 March 2020.





Categories


Aeromedical,
              ANS Contingency Planning












Feedback