ESARR 2











  ESARR 2









Article Information

Category:



ESARRs 








Content source:




 EUROCONTROL





 









Content control:




 EUROCONTROL





 















ESARR 2 - Reporting and Assessment of Safety Occurrences in ATM
Description
ESARR 2 mandates the implementation of a harmonised occurrence reporting and assessment scheme by EUROCONTROL member states. European Civil Aviation Conference (ECAC) member states who are not members of EUROCONTROL are also encouraged to apply it.
The requirement promotes a consistent and systematic reporting and assessment process, encourages the establishment of a non-punitive environment and is designed to act as an effective contribution to accident and serious risk bearing incident prevention.
ESARR 2 defines:

Requirements on the main phases of the occurrence reporting and assessment process: occurrence reporting; data collection, data analysis, risk classification, recommendation formulation; recommendation implementation and monitoring; safety data and experience exchange.
The ATM-related occurrences which shall, as a minimum, be reported and assessed by States.
The minimum appropriate safety data which shall be collated and reported to EUROCONTROL by States, expressed in terms of high level safety indicators.
Harmonised terms and definitions.

Severity Classification Schemes
Severity classification schemes for ATM related occurrences are developed in a companion document to ESARR 2 (see below) to enable its implementation by national regulatory and service provider organisation. The schemes allow:

Classification of occurrences according to the severity of their effect on the safe operations of aircraft and occupants; and
Classification of occurrences according to the severity of their effect on the ability to provide safe ATM services.

Implementation
Implementation of ESARR 2 by service providers and States will enable:

Assessment of safety performance against performance targets and related trends over time.
Identification of key risk area to act upon.
Identification of ATM system contribution to all types of safety occurrences.
Identification of risk reduction strategies, approaches and measures.

Transposition into Community Law
The majority of ESARR 2 requirments has been transposed into European Community law by the following Directives:

Regulation (EU) No 376/2014 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 3 April 2014 on the reporting, analysis and follow-up of occurrences in civil aviation, amending Regulation (EU) No 996/2010 of the European Parliament and of the Council and repealing Directive 2003/42/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council and Commission Regulations (EC) No 1321/2007 and (EC) No 1330/2007, and
Council Directive 94/56/EC of 21 November 1994 establishing the fundamental principles governing the investigation of civil aviation accidents and incidents.

For more detailed informaion go to article: Transposition of ESARRs into Community Law
Further Reading
EUROCONTROL

ESARR 2 - Reporting and Assessment of Safety Occurrences in ATM;
Severity Classification Scheme for Safety Occurrences in ATM;
Publication and Confidentiality Policy;
Mapping between the EUROCONTROL Severity Classification Scheme & the ICAO AIRPROX Severity Scheme;
Explanatory Material on ESARR 2 Requirements;
Guidance Material for Harmonisation of Safety Occurrence Severity and Risk Assessment;
Establishment of “Just Culture” Principles in ATM Safety Data Reporting and Assessment;
ESARR 2 and Related Safety Oversight;
Guidelines on the Systemic Occurrence Analysis Methodology (SOAM);
ESARR 2 Presentation;
ESARR 2 - FAQ.
Annual Summary Template in accordance with ESARR 2
Guidance for the completion of the Annual Summary Template
Consistency between ESARR 2 and ICAO SARPs





Categories


ESARRs












Feedback