B412, vicinity Karlsborg Sweden, 2003











  B412, vicinity Karlsborg Sweden, 2003









Summary

On 25 March 2003, the crew of a Bell 412 lost control of the aircraft as a result of pilot mishandling associated with the development of a Vortex Ring State.




Event Details

When

25/03/2003



Event Type


HF,
              LOC




Day/Night

Day



Flight Conditions

VMC







Flight Details

Aircraft


 

BELL B-412









Operator

Swedish Armed Forces



Type of Flight

Military/State



Flight Origin




Karlsborg







Intended Destination




Karlsborg







Take-off Commenced

Yes



Flight Airborne

Yes



Flight Completed

No



Phase of Flight

Manoeuvring








Location








Location - Airport

Airport

ESIA




HF

Tag(s)


              Ineffective Monitoring,
              Manual Handling
          




LOC

Tag(s)


              Flight Management Error,
              Extreme Pitch
          




Outcome

Damage or injury

Yes



Aircraft damage

Hull loss



Non-aircraft damage

Yes



Non-occupant Casualties

No



Occupant Injuries

Few occupants



Occupant Fatalities

Few occupants



Number of Occupant Fatalities

1



Off Airport Landing

Yes



Ditching

Yes




Causal Factor Group(s)

Group(s)

Aircraft Operation




Safety Recommendation(s)

Group(s)

Aircraft Operation
Aircraft Airworthiness




Investigation Type

Type

Independent









Description
On 25 March 2003, the crew of a Bell 412 lost control of the aircraft as a result of pilot mishandling associated with the development of a Vortex Ring State.
Summary
This is the Summary from the report published by the Swedish Accident Investigation Board:
"During the concluding Swedish Army exercise for 2003…a military ambulance helicopter based on the Karlsborg base took part. In connection with a rescue exercise, air-sea rescue open water (LÖV), the helicopter performed repeated sorties to assist simulated emergency cases in lakes in the vicinity of Karlsborg. In the final phase of the ninth sortie, the pilots lost control of the helicopter which, with a high rate of descent, struck the ice on Bottensjön lake. The ice broke on impact, the helicopter turned over onto its back and sank nose-first towards the bottom of the lake and with the rear of the fuselage against the edge of the ice at water level.
Three crew members were able to leave the helicopter and make their way up to the surface of the water and onto the ice. A fourth crew member drowned in the accident…
…Investigation revealed no technical faults or shortcomings that could have caused the accident.
…The accident was caused by the helicopter being manoeuvred into an aerodynamic situation in which, as its speed was being reduced to IAS=0, sank into its own downwash located diagonally in front of and below the helicopter. This aerodynamic situation developed into a vortex ring state (VRS) which became noticeable in the measurement data approximately 8 s before impact on the ice, whereafter the helicopter’s rate of descent could not be prevented despite increasing input of collective pitch. A contributory cause of the accident was the two pilots’ simultaneous manoeuvring of the helicopter. This allowed small or no chance of discovering in time that they were approaching the helicopter’s limit for safe flight."
Related Articles
LOC

Loss of Control,
Vortex Ring

Further Reading
For further information see the full Report published by the Swedish Accident Investigation Board (SHK).