B734, Barcelona Spain, 2004











  B734, Barcelona Spain, 2004









Summary

On 28 November 2004, a KLM B737-400 departed laterally from the runway on landing at Barcelona due to the effects on the nosewheel steering of a bird strike which had occured as the aircraft took off from Amsterdam.




Event Details

When

28/11/2004



Event Type


AW,
              BS,
              RE




Day/Night

Day



Flight Conditions

VMC







Flight Details

Aircraft


 

BOEING 737-400









Operator

KLM



Type of Flight

Public Transport (Passenger)



Flight Origin




Amsterdam Airport Schiphol







Intended Destination




Barcelona/El Prat Airport







Take-off Commenced

Yes



Flight Airborne

Yes



Flight Completed

No



Phase of Flight

Landing








Location








Location - Airport

Airport

LEBL




BS

Tag(s)


              Significant Airframe Damage
          




RE

Tag(s)


              Overrun on Landing,
              Directional Control,
              Off side of Runway
          




EPR

Tag(s)


              Emergency Evacuation,
              MAYDAY declaration,
              RFFS Procedures
          




CS

Tag(s)


              Evacuation slides deployed,
              Flight Crew Evacuation Command
          




AW

System(s)


              Equipment / Furnishings,
              Landing Gear
          



Contributor(s)


              Maintenance Error (valid guidance available),
              Damage Tolerance,
              Pilot verbal-only defect communication
          




Outcome

Damage or injury

Yes



Aircraft damage

Hull loss



Non-aircraft damage

Yes



Non-occupant Casualties

No



Occupant Injuries

Few occupants



Occupant Fatalities

None



Off Airport Landing

Yes



Ditching

Yes




Causal Factor Group(s)

Group(s)

Aircraft Operation
Aircraft Technical




Safety Recommendation(s)

Group(s)

Aircraft Operation
Aircraft Airworthiness
Airport Management




Investigation Type

Type

Independent









Description
On 28 November 2004, a KLM B737-400 departed laterally from the runway on landing at Barcelona due to the effects on the nosewheel steering of a bird strike which had occured as the aircraft took off from Amsterdam.
Synopsis
The following is an extract from the synopsis of the Accident Report published by the Spanish CAIAIC:
"During the takeoff…from Amsterdam to Barcelona, the aircraft suffered a bird strike in the area of the nose landing gear during rotation. The crew informed ATC and the flight continued without any abnormal indication in the cockpit. During the landing roll at Barcelone, when the nose wheels touched down, the aircraft started deviating to the left of runway 25R. The flight crew applied right rudder, brakes and used the nose wheel steering tiller but could not avoid that the aircraft went off the runway through the unprepared terrain located to the left of runway 25R. The aircraft suffered major damage during that run until it eventually came to a stop close to a wide rain drainage canal located 107m from the runway axis.
An emergency evacuation was carried out in which 5 passengers suffered minor injuries. There was no fire.
The investigation determined that the accident probably happened because during the takeoff a bird strike broke one of the cables of the nosewheel steering system of the aircraft, which made that the nose wheels were rotated to the left when they touched down during landing, causing a veering to the left that could not be arrested by full rudder deflection as the aircraft decelerated. The subsequent application of brakes and other actions by the crew could not avoid that the aircraft went outside the runway surface.
…Contributing to the breaking of the cable was the fact that the cable was severely worn locally. The wear could be traced back to the incorrect application of grease to the cable system during maintenance…."
Related Articles

Airworthiness
Bird Strike
Runway Excursion

Further Reading

For further information, see the full CAIAIC Report into the incident