European Air Traffic Management (EATM)











  European Air Traffic Management (EATM)









Article Information

Category:



General 








Content source:




 SKYbrary





 









Content control:




 EUROCONTROL





 















Description
EUROCONTROL has as its primary objective the development of a seamless, pan-European Air Traffic Management system. The achievement of this objective is central in overcoming both the present and future challenges facing the air transport industry. These challenges are to cope with the growth forecast for air traffic, while maintaining a high level of safety; reducing costs and respecting the environment.
EUROCONTROL develops, coordinates and plans for the collective implementation of short-, medium- and long-term pan-European air traffic management strategies and their associated action plans. It does this in close collaboration with national authorities, air navigation service providers, civil and military airspace users, airports, industry, professional organisations and European institutions.
EUROCONTROL's core activities span the entire range of gate-to-gate air navigation service operations - from strategic and tactical flow management to controller training; from regional control of airspace to the development of leading-edge, safety-proved technologies and procedures; they include the collection of air navigation charges. The development of Air Traffic Management (ATM) is managed within EUROCONTROL’s European Air Traffic Management programme, known as EATM.
EATM is a multi-phased programme of activities: it starts by developing the initial strategies, concepts and roadmaps for enhancing European ATM performance and leads up to the management of a portfolio of implementation programmes and service provision.
EATM underpins the introduction of the Single European Sky (SES) concept and SESAR, the Single European Sky ATM Research programme. It is dedicated to meeting airspace users’ and air navigation service providers’ needs for greater efficiency, transparency and clarity.
The European ATM performance enhancement activities are based on a top-down and performance-led approach that sets quantifiable and measurable performance targets in the key ATM performance areas.
Performance Objectives
The Provisional Council of EUROCONTROL has defined the following performance objectives:

to further improve ATM safety whilst accommodating air traffic growth;
to match capacity and air transport growth, towards the economic optimum in delays capacity;
to increase the efficiency of the ATM network;
to strengthen ATM's contribution to aviation security;
to strengthen ATM’s contribution to environmental objectives.

Further Reading

Five Defensive Measures to Improve the Cyber Security of European ATM by Prof. Chris Johnson, 2018

For further information refer to the EUROCONTROL EATM website




Categories


General












Feedback