B763, Copenhagen Denmark, 1999











  B763, Copenhagen Denmark, 1999









Summary

On 24 August 1999, a Boeing 767-300 being operated by SAS on a scheduled passenger flight from Copenhagen to Tokyo was unable to get airborne from the take off roll on Runway 22R in normal daylight visibility and made a rejected take off from high speed. The aircraft was taxied clear of the runway and after a precautionary attendance of the RFFS because of overheated brakes, the passengers were disembarked and transported to the terminal. There was minor damage to the aircraft landing gear and rear fuselage.




Event Details

When

24/08/1999



Event Type


FIRE,
              GND,
              HF,
              RE




Day/Night

Day



Flight Conditions

On Ground - Normal Visibility







Flight Details

Aircraft


 

BOEING 767-300ER









Operator

SAS



Type of Flight

Public Transport (Passenger)



Flight Origin




Copenhagen Airport, Kastrup







Intended Destination




Tokyo Narita Airport







Actual Destination




Copenhagen Airport, Kastrup







Take-off Commenced

Yes



Flight Airborne

No



Flight Completed

Yes



Phase of Flight

Take Off








Location








Location - Airport

Airport

EKCH




General

Tag(s)


              Extra flight crew (no training),
              Flight Crew Training,
              Inadequate Aircraft Operator Procedures
          




FIRE

Tag(s)


              Landing Gear Overheat
          




HF

Tag(s)


              Data use error,
              Pre Flight Data Input Error,
              Ineffective Monitoring,
              Procedural non compliance
          




RE

Tag(s)


              High Speed RTO (V above 80 but not above V1),
              Unable to rotate at VR
          




Outcome

Damage or injury

Yes



Aircraft damage

Minor



Non-aircraft damage

Yes



Non-occupant Casualties

No



Off Airport Landing

Yes



Ditching

Yes




Causal Factor Group(s)

Group(s)

Aircraft Operation




Safety Recommendation(s)

Group(s)

Aircraft Operation




Investigation Type

Type

Independent









Description
On 24 August 1999, a Boeing 767-300 being operated by SAS on a scheduled passenger flight from Copenhagen to Tokyo was unable to get airborne from the take off roll on Runway 22R in normal daylight visibility and made a rejected take off from high speed. The aircraft was taxied clear of the runway and after a precautionary attendance of the RFFS because of overheated brakes, the passengers were disembarked and transported to the terminal. There was minor damage to the aircraft landing gear and rear fuselage.
Investigation
An Investigation was carried out by the Danish AAIB. It was noted that the damage to the aircraft was limited to the main landing gear and wear to the Tail Skid Pad beyond limitations. A runway inspection found marks from the Tail Skid Pad.
The Investigation noted that the aircraft had been at close to the maximum permitted take off weight and that a cruise relief pilot had been present in the flight deck for the departure but was not assigned any duties during take-off or landing. It also noted that electrical power to the 30 minute Cockpit Voice Recorder (CVR) had not been interrupted after the incident and that consequently, no useful recording from it was available to the Investigation.
It was found that the First Officer was near to completing line training on type and was designated as PF for the flight. This flight was the first for which he had set up the aircraft FMS. When this was started, the load sheet was not available and so the actual weights could not be entered. After subsequently receiving and accepting the load sheet, the aircraft commander entered the correct Zero Fuel Weight (ZFW) into the FMS. The First Officer then entered ZFW into the ACARS in the space where the Actual Take Off Weight should have been entered. The input data was then transmitted to a land based computer to make the take-off performance calculation with the result then transmitted back to the ACARS where it was printed out. Upon receipt, the cruise relief pilot noticed that the MAC was 7.0%, the default value, and commented that this value was not correct for the flight. According to the load sheet, the MAC was 19.0%. The print out was not checked further and instead the First Officer initiated a new take-off data computation by entering MAC 19% as input. The flight crew checked the new printout and considered the data to be correct so the aircraft commander entered the computed take-off speeds into the FMS and they were then displayed on the flight instruments. None of the flight crew actually checked the take-off data during the short taxi to the departure runway holding point.
After the Vr call on the take off roll, the control column was moved rearwards and the nose gear left the ground at 143 KIAS. After this, the aircraft failed to become airborne and the aircraft continued to roll down the runway with a pitch of 9° and the Tail Skid Pad in contact with the runway. Seven seconds after the nose gear left the ground the aircraft commander called “stop and my controls”, lowered the aircraft nose and began to slow the aircraft from a maximum speed of 158 KIAS.
Once the aircraft was clear of the runway and stopped on an adjacent taxiway, the cruise relief pilot re calculated the take-off data using a portable Take-off Data Computer (TODC). The results from the recalculation, with the values actually used following in brackets were:
Take Off Weight 186, 800kg (123,500)
V1 = 166 knots (133 knots)
Vr = 166 knots (133 knots)
V2 = 172 knots (139 knots)
The Investigation concluded that the take-off performance calculation was based on a too low a take off weight so that the values used for V1, Vr and V2 were too low. The wrong value of Vr resulted in the aircraft being rotated at too low a speed. The check of the take-off performance data was not sufficient.
The Final Report of the Investigation may be seen in full at SKYbrary bookshelf" HCL 49/99
Three Safety Recommendations were made as a result of the Investigation and are reproduced as published in the Report below:
REK-01-2000
That the Danish Civil Aviation Administration ensures that the commander makes an estimate of the flight performance data and flight planning data. The estimate shall as a minimum cover:
a. Estimated en route time.
b. Trip fuel.
c. Zero Fuel Mass.
d. Take-off Mass.
e. Take-off Speeds.
f. Landing Mass.
g. Landing Speeds.
REK-02-2000
That the Danish Civil Aviation Administration ensures that the layout of flight data reduces the possibility of mistakes.
REK-03-2000
That the Danish Civil Aviation Administration, when approving operators FOM, complies with ICAO Standard 6.3.10.
Further Reading

Rejected Take Off
Deceleration on the Runway
Use of Erroneous Parameters at Take-Off
Aircraft Load and Trim
Takeoff Weight Entry Error and Fatigue (OGHFA SE)
Adherence to SOPs (OGHFA BN)
Flight Preparation and Conducting Effective Briefings (OGHFA BN)
ATSB Safety Study: Take-off performance parameter errors: A global perspective