Promotion in Contingency











  Promotion in Contingency









Article Information

Category:



ANS Contingency Planning







Content source:




 SKYbrary





 









Content control:




 SKYbrary





 















Definition
Contingency planning Promotion ensures communication of the contingency culture, dissemination of lessons learned and enables the continuous improvement of the process.
Objective
The objective of contingency Promotion is to establish communication channels that disseminate information about plans and also promote feedback about contingency concerns. The aim of the Promotion activities should be to embed contingency planning into air navigation service providers (ANSPs) normal management and operational process; it should become part of the culture and not be seen as a separate activity of a specialist few.
Description
Contingency planning Promotion ensures communication of the contingency culture, dissemination of lessons learned and enables continuous improvement. Training, testing and exercising will increase the profile of contingency within ANSPs but a targeted awareness campaign can also help to spread the word. The Promotion step includes:

Post-event analysis: whenever a contingency plan is exercised whether as a test or live event. It is recommended that there is an immediate debriefing meeting of senior executives and others closely associated with implementation and execution. In view of identifying lessons learned and implementing recommendations, if any.
Updates of contingency plans and crisis management plans. Maintenance of contingency plans should be embedded with ANSPs' normal management processes rather than be a separate structure that can be forgotten.
Ensure change control mechanism is provided for all contingency planning components.
Dissemination of information: it is of utmost importance that those who will be affected by the plans remain aware of their responsibilities.

Related Articles

Contingency Process
Policy on Contingency
Training for Contingency Operations
Testing and Exercising

Further Reading

For further information on Contingency Planning see the EUROCONTROL, Guidelines for Contingency Planning for Air Navigation Services (including Service Continuity). In particular, further details are provided in Chapter 12.
See also the EUROCONTROL Reference Guide to EUROCONTROL Guidelines for Contingency Planning, especially Chapter 9.





Categories


ANS Contingency Planning












Feedback