A310, vicinity Birmingham UK, 2006











  A310, vicinity Birmingham UK, 2006









Summary

On 24 November 2006, an A310 descended significantly below cleared altitude during a radar vectored approach positioning, as a result of the flight crew's failure to set the QNH, which was unusually low.




Event Details

When

24/11/2006



Event Type


CFIT,
              HF,
              LB




Day/Night

Night



Flight Conditions

IMC







Flight Details

Aircraft


 

AIRBUS A-310









Operator

Mahan Air



Type of Flight

Public Transport (Passenger)



Flight Origin




Mehrabad Airport







Intended Destination




Birmingham International Airport







Take-off Commenced

Yes



Flight Airborne

Yes



Flight Completed

Yes



Phase of Flight

Descent








Location








Location - Airport

Airport

EGBB




General

Tag(s)


              Altimeter Setting Error
          




HF

Tag(s)


              Data use error,
              Ineffective Monitoring,
              Procedural non compliance
          




LB

Tag(s)


              Accepted ATC Clearance not followed
          




Outcome

Damage or injury

No



Non-aircraft damage

No



Non-occupant Casualties

No



Off Airport Landing

No



Ditching

No




Causal Factor Group(s)

Group(s)

Aircraft Operation




Safety Recommendation(s)

Group(s)

None Made




Investigation Type

Type

Independent









Description
On 24 November 2006, an AIRBUS A-310 descended significantly below cleared altitude during a radar vectored approach positioning, as a result of the flight crew's failure to set the Altimeter Pressure Settings, which was unusually low.
Synopsis
The aircraft was being radar vectored towards a night ILS approach to Runway 15 at Birmingham Airport. The radar controller had cleared the crew to descend to an altitude of 2,500 ft, but noticed that the aircraft had descended to almost 1000 feet below the cleared altitude at a range of 11-12nm, in the presence of an obstruction in the vicinity. The crew were instructed to climb and given the QNH, which they had not set. With the correct QNH set, the aircraft climbed and levelled as instructed at 2,000 feet and were then cleared to intercept the localiser and continue descent with the glideslope after which a normal landing was completed.
The AAIB Report includes the following analysis:
"The crew had not changed the altimeter setting from the standard setting of 1013 hPa to the Birmingham QNH of 982 hPa when first cleared to descend from a flight level to an altitude. Based on an average height of 30 ft per hPa, a height difference of 930 ft existed between the aircraft actual altitude and that indicated on the altimeters. Consequently, thus when the altimeters were indicating 2,500 ft the aircraft had actually descended to 1,570 ft. As the aircraft continued its descent below its cleared level of 2,500 ft the radar controller notified the crew and warned them of the mast ahead. Having realised that the altimeter sub scale setting was incorrect the crew initiated an immediate climb, re-set the altimeters to the correct QNH and followed the controller’s instructions. The crew could not recall any distractions or unusual flight deck activity at the point at which they would normally have adjusted the altimeter sub-scales."
Related Articles

Level Bust
Loss of Separation
Controlled Flight Into Terrain (CFIT)

Further Reading

For further information, see the full AAIB Report