CL60, Teterboro USA, 2005











  CL60, Teterboro USA, 2005









Summary

On 2 February 2005, a Challenger, belonging to Platinum Jet Management, crashed after taking off from Teterboro, New Jersey, USA. The aircraft's center of gravity was well forward of the forward takeoff limit.




Event Details

When

02/02/2005



Event Type


FIRE,
              HF,
              RE




Day/Night

Day



Flight Conditions

On Ground - Normal Visibility







Flight Details

Aircraft


 

BOMBARDIER Challenger 600









Operator

Platinum Jet Management



Type of Flight

Public Transport (Passenger)



Flight Origin




Teterboro







Intended Destination




Chicago Midway International Airport







Take-off Commenced

Yes



Flight Airborne

No



Flight Completed

No



Phase of Flight

Take Off








Location








Location - Airport

Airport

KTEB




General

Tag(s)


              Inadequate Aircraft Operator Procedures,
              Ineffective Regulatory Oversight
          




FIRE

Tag(s)


              Post Crash Fire
          




HF

Tag(s)


              Data use error,
              Ineffective Monitoring,
              Procedural non compliance,
              Violation
          




RE

Tag(s)


              Overrun on Take Off,
              RTO decision after V1,
              Unable to rotate at VR
          




Outcome

Damage or injury

Yes



Aircraft damage

Hull loss



Non-aircraft damage

Yes



Non-occupant Casualties

No



Occupant Injuries

Most or all occupants



Occupant Fatalities

None



Off Airport Landing

Yes



Ditching

Yes




Causal Factor Group(s)

Group(s)

Aircraft Operation




Safety Recommendation(s)

Group(s)

Aircraft Operation




Investigation Type

Type

Independent









Description
On 2 February 2005, a Challenger, being operated by Platinum Jet Management, crashed after attempting a high speed rejected take off due to difficulty rotating to depart Teterboro, New Jersey, USA. The aircraft center of gravity was found to have been outside the allowable envelope for take off and the rejected take off to have been commenced at a substantial margin above the applicable V1 speed.
Synopsis
This is an extract from the Executive Summary of the official report into the accident published by the National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) (USA).
“On February 2, 2005, about 0718 eastern standard time, a Bombardier Challenger CL-600-1A11, N370V, ran off the departure end of runway 6 at Teterboro Airport (TEB), Teterboro, New Jersey, at a ground speed of about 110 kts; through an airport perimeter fence; across a six-lane highway (where it struck a vehicle); and into a parking lot before impacting a building. The two pilots were seriously injured, as were two occupants in the vehicle. The cabin aide, eight passengers, and one person in the building received minor injuries. The airplane was destroyed by impact forces and postimpact fire. The accident flight was an on-demand passenger charter flight from TEB to Chicago Midway Airport, Chicago, Illinois. The flight was …operated by Platinum Jet Management…Visual meteorological conditions prevailed for the flight, which operated on an instrument flight rules flight plan. The National Transportation Safety Board determines that the probable cause of the accident was the pilots’ failure to ensure the airplane was loaded within weight-and-balance limits and their attempt to take off with the center of gravity well forward of the forward takeoff limit, which prevented the airplane from rotating at the intended rotation speed.”
Related Articles

Ground Operations
Runway Excursion

Further Reading

NTSB Accident Report AAR-06/04, Runway Overrun and Collision, Platinum Jet Management, LLC, Bombardier Challenger CL-600-1A11, N370V, Teterboro, New Jersey, February 2, 2005.