ESARR 2 - Advisory Material











  ESARR 2 - Advisory Material









Article Information

Category:



ESARRs 








Content source:




 EUROCONTROL





 









Content control:




 EUROCONTROL





 















Description
In order to achieve a harmonised European air traffic management system, EUROCONTROL Member States have agreed to implement a range of EUROCONTROL Safety Regulatory Requirements (ESARRs), aimed at defining minimum levels of ATM safety for implementation by States, within a total aviation safety system approach. ECAC States which are not members of the EUROCONTROL Organisation, are strongly encouraged to implement ESARRs to ensure consistent safety levels in ECAC.
The safety regulatory authorities of the EUROCONTROL member states are responsible for the transposition of the ESARR provisions into national safety regulatory requirements. To date, six ESARRs are in force.
ESARR 2 addresses the Reporting and Assessment of Safety Occurrences in ATM.
In the case of each ESARR, it is the intention to support ESARR implementation through the publication of ESARR Advisory Material.
The Purpose of Advisory Material
ESARR Advisory Material is issued by the EUROCONTROL Safety Regulation Commission as a series of SRC Publications aimed at:

Providing clarification and further explanation leading to improved understanding of the detailed requirements in the ESARR
Facilitating the application of the ESARR by national regulatory bodies, and the compliance with the ESARR requirements by regulated organisations and personnel
Providing additional information regarding relevant tools and techniques to assist implementation of the requirements
Informing stakeholders of the relationship between the ESARR requirements and corresponding or related international rules and standards.
In relevant cases, assessing industry processes, procedures and techniques as Acceptable Means of Compliance with the ESARR requirements.

Support to ESARR 2 Implementation
Accordingly, ESARR 2 Advisory Material has been structured as follows: -

EAM 2/GUI 1 - Severity Classification Scheme for Safety Occurrences in ATM defines two Severity Classification Schemes to be used when analysing ATM related occurrences

One that allows the classification of occurrences according to the severity of their effect on the safe operations of aircraft and occupants; and
One that allows the classification of occurrences according to the severity of their effect on the ability to provide safe Air Traffic Management Services,



to be applied to the Safety Measurement of ATM and support the implementation of ESARR 2.
The full text of EAM 2/GUI 1 can be viewed here.

EAM 2/GUI 2 - Publication and Confidentiality Policy (Under Review) defines the rules for the sharing and publishing safety information, and for addressing confidentiality issues. More specifically, it addresses the confidentiality of the shared safety information, by considering the use of de-identification of information, security access means and legal instruments. It also specifies the type and level of information that could be released to the Public, in order to demonstrate the levels of safety being achieved in aviation.
EAM 2/GUI 3 - Mapping between the EUROCONTROL Severity Classification Scheme & the ICAO AIRPROX Severity Scheme aims to ensure that ESARR2 Implementation is consistent with related ICAO SARPs and best practices (Doc. 4444). To reinforce this consistency, and to clarify further the ESARR 2 “Severity Classification Scheme” (see EAM 2/GUI 1), a mapping with the ICAO AIRPROX scheme has been included in the document.

The full text of EAM 2/GUI 3 can be viewed here.

EAM 2/GUI 4 - Explanatory Material on ESARR 2 Requirements provides guidance about the provisions established in ESARR 2, illustrated by explanatory material that includes a rationale, as well as documenting the most significant implications for Regulators, but also for service-providers and for Investigation bodies.

The full text of EAM 2/GUI 4 can be viewed here.

EAM 2/GUI 5 - Harmonisation of Safety Occurrence Severity and Risk Assessment provides support guidelines to State organisations in order to harmonise the reporting, assessing and subsequent analysis of safety occurrences in compliance with the EUROCONTROL ESARR 2 Severity Classification scheme (see EAM 2/GUI 1). The document contains a core text followed by a summary annex containing guidelines on the developed mark sheets. It also includes components and information that should be appropriate to the development of training courses on ESARR 2.

The full text of EAM 2/GUI 5 can be viewed here.

EAM 2/GUI 6 - Establishment of ‘Just Culture’ Principles in ATM Safety Data Reporting & Assessment is derived from the research of existing best practices and in particular from the conclusions and recommendations of EUROCONTROL’s “Safety Data Reporting and Data Flow Task Force” report. The document supports implementation of ESARR 2, especially when encountering difficulty in introducing reporting and assessment systems. The document also gives some examples of how the Global Aviation Information Network (GAIN) Document “A Roadmap to a Just Culture” could work in practice, and hence can be seen as an ATM sector application of the RoadMap.

The full text of EAM 2/GUI 6 can be viewed here.

EAM 2/GUI 7 - ESARR 2 and Related Safety Oversight includes guidance on the criteria for the assessment of compliance with ESARR 2 and, using the same approach adopted for all ESARRs, examines the most significant implications for Regulator and Provider, and information about further development.

The full text of EAM 2/GUI 7 can be viewed here.

EAM 2/GUI 8 - Guidelines on the Systematic Occurrence Analysis Methodology (SOAM) describe the application of the methodology to the investigation of Air Traffic Management (ATM) safety occurrences. This methodology, developed for EUROCONTROL, is one of a number of accident investigation methodologies based on the Reason Model of organisational accidents. Full implementation of the methodology is expected to improve the degree to which the key safety objectives of ESARR 2 are met.

The full text of EAM 2/GUI 8 can be viewed here.
Related Articles

ESARR 2
ESARR Implementation
Transposition of ESARRs into European Community Law
ESARR Implementation Monitoring and Support (ESIMS)

Further Reading

ESARR 2 - Reporting and Assessment of Safety Occurrences in ATM;
ESARR 2 Presentation;
ESARR 2 - FAQ;
Detailed information on ESARRs and related ESARR Advisory Material can be found in related Articles in this Category, and also on the EUROCONTROL website
ESARR 2 guidance material ESTABLISHMENT OF ‘JUST CULTURE’ PRINCIPLES IN ATM SAFETY DATA REPORTING AND ASSESSMENT





Categories


ESARRs,
              Just Culture












Feedback