Hindsight 30











  Hindsight 30









Article Information

Category:



General 








Content source:




 EUROCONTROL





 









Content control:




 SKYbrary





 
















Download the full HindSight 30 magazine here
Published in April 2020, HindSight 30 focused on the theme of Wellbeing.
This edition also includes a supplement only available on-line.
Welcome
Welcome to Issue 30 of HindSight magazine – the EUROCONTROL magazine on the safety of air traffic management. The theme of this Issue is ‘Wellbeing’, which has an undeniable link to safe operations, though this is not often spoken about.
This Issue coincides with the COVID-19 pandemic. The authors of the articles in this Issue were considering wellbeing in the context of aviation, and other industries. But the articles touch on topics that are deeply relevant to the pandemic. The spread of the virus and its effect on our everyday lives has brought the biological, psychological, social, environmental, and economic aspects of wellbeing into clear view in a way we have never seen before.
With HindSight, we hope to help support conversations about wellbeing, not only now during the coronavirus pandemic, but after coronavirus. Please let your operational and non-operational colleagues know about this Issue of HindSight.
The next Issue is on ‘Learning from Everyday Work’. What have you, your peers and your organisation learned by paying attention to what goes on in everyday work, whether things go well or not so well? Let us know, in a few words or more, for Issue 31 of HindSight magazine.
HindSight 30 Articles
Foreword

Foreword, by John Santurbano.
Welcome
Invited foreword, by Carsten Fich.
Can we talk about mental wellbeing?, by Steven Shorrock.

Op-ed

Why should your wellbeing matter to anyone else?, by Suzanne Shale.

The long read

QF32 and post-traumatic stress, Steven Shorrock reports on an interview with Captain Richard Champion de Crespigny.

Views from the Ground

Stress: acute and chronic, by Carol Quinn.
System wellbeing, by Anders Ellerstrand.
Wellbeing: a shared responsibility between organisations and professionals, by Guadalupe Cortes Oberero and Marc Baumgartner.
Comfort at work: a spoiled child's whim or conditions for safety?, by Emmanuelle Gravalon.
Safety management Q&A, by Andrea Sack.

Views from the Air

Pilot wellbeing: the lived experience of the pilot, by Captain Paul Cullen.
Wellbeing, culture and the need for a psychologically safe environment , by Captain Paul Reuter.
The professional and the personal, by Nick Carpenter.
A survey of professional pilots' health and wellbeing, by Marion Venus.

Organisational and professional initiatives

The energy project @MUAC, by Marinella Leone.
A New Zealand aviation peer assistance network, by Herwin Bongers.
Managing the impact of serious incidents, by Robin Gurt.
Clear to calm: a promising future for mindfulness in ATM, by Alberto Rodriguez de la Flor.
Addressing mental health issues in the pilot community with peer support, by the European Pilot Peer Support Initiative Board.
Stress prevention through organisational-level interventions, by Paola Tomasello, Simone Pozzi, Giacomo Dusi, Gianluca Del Pinto and Stefano Bonelli.

Views from elsewhere

Burnout in emergency medicine: how do we get better?, by Shannon McNamara.
Steadying the mind: mindfulness in the nuclear industry and beyond, by Martin Summerfield.
It's ok to talk, by Andy Elwood.

In conversation

Learning from behaviour change psychology: a conversation with Nick Godbehere, by Steven Shorrock.

Research showcase

Aviation human factors at the University of Southampton, by Dr Katie Plant and Prof.Neville Stanton

HindSight 30 On-line Supplement

Steadying the mind: a pilot's perspective, by Captain Paul Cullen.
Brussels Airlines Pilot Peer Support Programme, by Veronica Taliano.
Clear to Calm: A pilot study on the effectiveness of a mindfulness-based stress reduction programme in ATM, by David Garcia Hermosilla, Alberto Rodriguez de la Flor and Andres Martin Asuero.

Register to Receive Your Copy of HindSight Magazine
Register here for a copy of HindSight magazine to be sent to you by post or email every time a new edition is published
See all editions of HindSight magazine




Categories


General












Feedback