Accident and Serious Incident Reports: Crew Incapacitation











  Accident and Serious Incident Reports: Crew Incapacitation









Article Information

Category:



Human Performance







Content source:




 SKYbrary





 









Content control:




 EUROCONTROL





 















Definition
A selection of reports relating to accidents and serious incidents which involved a Pilot Incapacitation.
Accidents
Events on the SKYbrary Database which list Incapacitation as a causal factor:


A339, en-route, east of Antigua & Barbuda, 2022On 17 January 2022, about 30 minutes after takeoff from Fort-de-France, Martinique, on an ETOPS flight, an Airbus A330-900 was approaching its initial cruise altitude when the apparently unconscious Captain appeared initially unresponsive. On being more aggressively roused, he seemed normal and a doctor on board initially assessed him as fit to continue. However, about two hours into the flight his condition subsequently deteriorated and the First Officer called the Chief Purser to take his seat to assist. A PAN, later upgraded to a MAYDAY, was declared and a diversion was made to Lajes where the Captain was hospitalised.

A339, en-route, east of Antigua & Barbuda, 2022On 17 January 2022, about 30 minutes after takeoff from Fort-de-France, Martinique, on an ETOPS flight, an Airbus A330-900 was approaching its initial cruise altitude when the apparently unconscious Captain appeared initially unresponsive. On being more aggressively roused, he seemed normal and a doctor on board initially assessed him as fit to continue. However, about two hours into the flight his condition subsequently deteriorated and the First Officer called the Chief Purser to take his seat to assist. A PAN, later upgraded to a MAYDAY, was declared and a diversion was made to Lajes where the Captain was hospitalised.

A359, en-route, west southwest of Manila Philippines, 2019On 21 February 2019, the Captain of an Airbus A350-900 in the cruise en-route to Hong Kong became and remained incapacitated. The First Officer took over control and completed the flight as planned without further event. The Cabin Crew Manager was called to the flight deck and advised and a doctor on board provided medical assistance to the Captain who remained conscious but with slurred speech and was hospitalised on arrival. It was concluded that the response to the situation had been effectively handled and the remainder of the flight was completed in accordance with all applicable procedures and training.

A359, en-route, west southwest of Manila Philippines, 2019On 21 February 2019, the Captain of an Airbus A350-900 in the cruise en-route to Hong Kong became and remained incapacitated. The First Officer took over control and completed the flight as planned without further event. The Cabin Crew Manager was called to the flight deck and advised and a doctor on board provided medical assistance to the Captain who remained conscious but with slurred speech and was hospitalised on arrival. It was concluded that the response to the situation had been effectively handled and the remainder of the flight was completed in accordance with all applicable procedures and training.

B738, en-route, southeast of Varanasi India, 2021On 17 November 2021, after a Boeing 737-800 commenced initial descent into Patna from FL350, a cautionary alert indicating automatic pressurisation system failure was annunciated. When the initial actions of the prescribed non-normal procedure did not resolve the problem, the system outflow valve was fully opened, and a rapid depressurisation followed. After this incorrect action, the relevant crew emergency procedures were then not properly followed. It was further concluded that the captain had temporarily lost consciousness after a delay in donning his oxygen mask. The context for the mismanaged response was identified as outflow valve in-service failure.


...further results


Related Articles

For all accident reports held on SKYbrary, see the main section on Accident Reports accessible through the sidebar menu on the left of your screen.





Categories


Human Performance












Feedback