Subtropical highland climate (Cwb)











  Subtropical highland climate (Cwb)









Article Information

Category:



Weather 








Content source:




 SKYbrary





 









Content control:




 SKYbrary





 















Description
Cwb: C = warm temperate  w = winter dry  b = warm summer
The subtropical highland climate is a climate variety often grouped together with oceanic climates and which exists in some mountainous or elevated portions of the world in either the subtropics or tropics. Despite the latitude, the higher elevations of these regions mean that the climate shares characteristics with oceanic climates.
Characteristics
Subtropical highland climates with monsoon influence have distinctive wet summers and dry winters.
In locations outside the tropics, other than the drying trend in the winter, subtropical highland climates tend to be essentially identical to an oceanic climate, with mild summers and noticeably cooler winters, plus, in some instances, some snowfall. In the tropics, a subtropical highland climate typically features mild weather year-round. Temperatures there remain relatively constant throughout the year and snowfall is seldom seen due to warmer winters than most oceanic climates.
Areas with this climate feature monthly averages below 22 °C but above either 0 °C or −3 °C depending on isotherm used. At least one month's average temperature is below 18 °C.
Location
 

Köppen–Geiger climate classification map for Oceanic climates (Cfb, Cfc, Cwb, Cwc). Source: Wikicommons. Authors: Peel M C, Finlayson B L, McMahon T A (University of Melbourne) 2011
Airports with a subtropical highland climate include:

Lalibela, Ethiopia.
Martin Miguel De Guemes International Airport, Argentina.
Quiche Airport, Guatemala
Kunming, China
Sumbawanga, Tanzania
Fianarantsoa, Madagascar

Flight safety and planning considerations
Destinations with a subtropical highland climate present relatively few weather related safety challenges beyond those associated with contaminated runways following rain or snow showers. 
During summer, low visibility in rain can be expected. Expect therefore that descent and approach will be completed in IMC. Be particularly aware of the location of high ground, especially if conducting non-precision and circling approaches and the fact that the higher altitude means a higher TAS.




Categories


Weather,
              Climate Classification









Related articles

Koppen climate classification system (KCC)













Feedback