Stabilised Approach











  Stabilised Approach









Toolkit Navigation


Stabilised Approach Awareness Toolkit for ATC






Contribution of Unstabilised Approaches to Aircraft Accidents and Incidents
Stabilised Approach
Flight Crew Workload in Preparation for the Execution of an Approach
Unstabilised Approach: Delayed Descent Instructions
Unstabilised Approach: Inappropriate ATC Speed Instructions
Unstabilised Approach: Lack of or Wrong Information About Distance to Touchdown
Unstabilised Approach: Landing Distance and Final Speed Calculations
Unstabilised Approach: Late Runway or Approach Type Change
Unstabilised Approach: Vectoring into Short Final Distances
Unstabilised Approach: Vectoring Resulting in Intercepting the Glidepath from Above
Unstabilised Approach: Vectoring to Runways with Significant Tailwind Component













Description
Most airlines and other aviation organisations specify minimum acceptable criteria for the continuation of an approach to land. These vary in detail but the following summary published by the Flight Safety Foundation is one view of the important considerations.
Their Approach-and-landing Accident Reduction (ALAR) Briefing Note 7-1 suggests that "all flights must be stabilised by 1000 feet above airport elevation in IMC and 500 feet above airport elevation in VMC. An approach is stabilised when all of the following criteria are met:

The aircraft is on the correct flight path
Only small changes in heading/pitch are necessary to maintain the correct flight path
The airspeed is not more than VREF + 20kts indicated speed and not less than VREF
The aircraft is in the correct landing configuration
Sink rate is no greater than 1000 feet/minute; if an approach requires a sink rate greater than 1000 feet/minute a special briefing should be conducted
Power setting is appropriate for the aircraft configuration and is not below the minimum power for the approach as defined by the operating manual
All briefings and checklists have been conducted
Specific types of approach are stabilized if they also fulfil the following:

ILS approaches must be flown within one dot of the glide-slope and localizer
a Category II or III approach must be flown within the expanded localizer band
during a circling approach wings should be level on final when the aircraft reaches 300 feet above airport elevation; and,


Unique approach conditions or abnormal conditions requiring a deviation from the above elements of a stabilized approach require a special briefing.

An approach that becomes unstabilised below 1000 feet above airport elevation in IMC or 500 feet above airport elevation in VMC requires an immediate go-around."
Other applications of the Stabilised Approach principle used outside North America do not necessarily distinguish between VMC and IMC approaches, which makes it possible to track compliance using OFDM.
Some Operators also specify aircraft status at a 'should' gate ahead of the 'must' gate envisaged by the FSF system. This is typically 500 feet above the 'must' gate, for example a 'should' gate at 1000ft agl followed by a 'must' gate at 500ft agl. Failure to satisfy the former requires that corrective action is feasible and taken whereas failure to satisfy the latter requires a go around.
Effects
Continuation of an unstabilised approach to land may result in an aircraft arriving at the runway threshold too high, too fast, out of alignment with the runway centre-line, incorrectly configured or otherwise unprepared for landing. This can result in aircraft damage on touch-down, or runway excursion and consequent injury or damage to the aircraft or airfield installations.
Defences
The existence of an appropriate procedure which allows flight crew to determine whether an approach is sufficiently stabilised to allow it to be continued at specified 'gates' with strict observance confirmed by automated tracking using the Operator's Flight Data Monitoring (FDM) Programme. Note that if the Flight Safety Foundation recommendation that there should be different 'gates' for IMC and VMC is followed, then such tracking becomes impossible.
Example Scenario
An aircraft on approach to land is not stabilised after a late clearance to reduce speed. SOPs require the aircraft to go-around in the event of an unstabilised approach but the pilot continues the approach because of a desire to complete the flight on schedule, thus creating a signficant risk of consequential mishap affecting both the aircraft and its occupants.
Contributory Factors

Adverse weather (e.g. strong or gusty winds, wind shear, turbulence).
ATC pressure to maximise number of movements (e.g. high approach speed).
Late change of runway.
Commercial pressure to maintain schedule.

Solutions

Strict compliance with the stabilised approach principle by pilots.
ATC awareness of factors within their control which can contribute to an unstabilised approach.

Accidents and Incidents Involving Unstabilised Approaches


CL60, London Stansted UK, 2022On 31 January 2022, a Bombardier Challenger 604 pilot lost control during the final stages of a London Stansted night crosswind landing. A bounced nose-gear-first touchdown was followed by a brief runway excursion onto grass before a return to the runway and a climb away. A diversion to London Gatwick followed without further event but subsequent inspection revealed structural and other damage sufficient to result in the aircraft being declared an economic hull loss. The Stansted touchdown was found to have occurred after a premature flare at idle thrust continued towards the stall and a momentary stick pusher activation occurred.

MD83, Mahshahr Iran, 2020On 27 January 2020, an MD83 made an unstabilised tailwind non-precision approach to Mahshahr with a consistently excessive rate of descent and corresponding EGPWS Warnings followed by a very late nose-gear-first touchdown. It then overran the runway end, continued through the airport perimeter fence and crossed over a ditch before coming to a stop partly blocking a busy main road. The aircraft sustained substantial damage and was subsequently declared a hull loss but all occupants completed an emergency evacuation uninjured. The accident was attributed to the actions of the Captain which included not following multiple standard operating procedures.

F900 / BT36, Bremgarten Germany, 2018On 28 April 2018, a Dassault Falcon F900B came into close proximity with a Beech B36T Bonanza at the uncontrolled VFR-only aerodrome at Bremgarten during its tailwind approach to runway 23 made without contacting the designated Flight Information frequency as the other aircraft was on approach to runway-in-use 05 and in contact with Flight Information. The Beech pilot took avoiding action by turning north and climbing in order to avoid a collision. The Falcon 900 crew had not prepared for the approach which was then unstabilised with late gear extension and multiple EGPWS ‘SINK RATE’ warnings annunciated.

AT75, vicinity Pokhara Nepal, 2023On 15 January 2023, an ATR 72-500 positioning visually for an approach to Pokhara suddenly departed controlled flight and impacted terrain. The aircraft was destroyed by the impact and all 71 occupants were killed. A type-experienced Training Captain was overseeing new airport familiarisation for a Line Captain acting as Pilot Flying. The Training Captain unintentionally feathered both propellers in response to a call for Flaps 30 but did not recognise their error or respond to calls that no power was coming from the engines. The airline’s operational safety-related processes and Regulatory oversight of them were both assessed as comprehensively inadequate.

B739, vicinity Atlanta GA USA, 2017On 29 November 2017, a Boeing 737-900 on an ILS approach at Atlanta became unstable after the autothrottle and autopilot were both disconnected and was erroneously aligned with an occupied taxiway parallel to the intended landing runway. A go-around was not commenced until the aircraft was 50 feet above the ground after which it passed low over another aircraft on the taxiway. The Investigation found that the Captain had not called for a go around until well below the Decision Altitude and had then failed to promptly take control when the First Officer was slow to begin climbing the aircraft.


...further results


SKYclips









 Read more




Speedcontrol for final approach (SKYclip)













 Read more




Shortcuts and unstable approaches (SKYclip)









Related Articles

Approach and Landing Accidents (ALA)
Loss of Control
Go Around
Accident and Serious Incident Reports: RE
Non-stabilized Approach After ATC-Requested Runway Change (OGHFA SE)
Runway Overrun On Landing (OGHFA SE)
Global Action Plan for the Prevention of Runway Excursions (GAPPRE)

Further Reading

Go-Around Safety Forum, Brussels 2013: Findings and Conclusions
Global Action Plan for the Prevention of Runway Excursions, Part 1 Recommendations and Part 2 Guidance and Explanatory Material, EUROCONTROL/Flight Safety Foundation, 5 May 2021.

DGAC (France) has published three documents in the English language related to non-stabilised approaches.
Flight Safety Foundation

ALAR Briefing Note 7.1 - Stabilized Approach
ALAR Briefing Note 8.1 - Runway Excursions and Overruns
Reducing the Risk of Runway Excursions - Report of the Runway Safety Initiative
Runway Excursion Risk Awareness Tool
Copies of the FSF ALAR Toolkit on CD may be obtained from the Flight Safety Foundation

Airbus Safety Library

Airbus Approach Techniques Briefing Note - Flying Stabilized Approaches
Control your Speed… During Descent, Approach and Landing, Airbus Safety First Magazine, #24, July 2017

CANSO

Runway Excursions - An ATC Perspective on Unstable Approaches
Avoiding Unstable Approaches - Important Tips for ATCOs
Unstable Approaches – ATC Considerations, January 2011

HindSight Articles:

HindSight4 - Economy versus Safety - the Professional’s Dilemma

Flight Data Services Case Study

Case Study 6: Winglets and Low Power Approaches