How Air Traffic Control Works











  How Air Traffic Control Works









Article Information

Category:



General 








Content source:




 SKYbrary





 









Content control:




 SKYbrary





 















This article serves as a repository of the content related to various aspects of air traffic control (ATC) that is available on SKYbrary. While some of the content can be of interest to air traffic controllers, the main purpose of this article is to provide a structured view on how ATC works to other professionals and aviation enthusiasts as well as to trainee air traffic controllers.

Communication Aspects

Air-ground communication is one of the most important aspects of air traffic control.

ATS Unit Callsigns
Callsign Change by ATC
Light and Pyrotechnic Signals
Multi-language ATC Operations
Urgency Instructions and Clearances
Unauthorised Use of ATC Frequency


The Place of Air Traffic Control

Air Traffic Management (ATM) comprises the following:

Air Traffic Service. This is a general term encompassing:

Air Traffic Control (ATC). This is the main service provided by air traffic controllers and is divided into:

Aerodrome control service. This is focused on aircraft on the ground (the manoeuvring area of the aerodrome) or in the vicinity of the aerodrome (mostly the Aerodrome Traffic Circuit)
Approach control service. This service links the aerodrome control and the area control and is focused on the climb, descent and approach phases of the flight.
Area control service. This service is focused on the cruising part of the flight.


Flight Information Service (FIS). This service is performed in uncontrolled airspace
Alerting Service. This service is provided in order to inform the Search and Rescue (SAR) facilities of aircraft in distress.


Air Traffic Flow Management (ATFM) is intended to arrange traffic flows in such a way as to avoid congestion and reduce the risk of controller overload.
Airspace Management (ASM) is intended to organize the airspace so that it meets the needs of the users in the most optimal way.

Controller Positions
Air Traffic Controllers
There are three main types (ratings) of air traffic controllers. Within each type, different roles may be defined to address specific aspects of traffic demand or the airspace served.

Tower Controller is a person that provides air traffic control service at and in the vicinity of an aerodrome.
Approach Controller is a person that provides air traffic control for departing and arriving flights. They are the link between the tower controllers and the area controllers.
Area Controller (sometimes called en-route controller) is a person that normally serves the flights during the cruise phase.

Other Similar Positions
These positions do not provide ATC service but there are many similarities between them and air traffic controllers.

FIS Officer is a person that provides flight information service.
Assistant is a person that assists air traffic controllers by performing some routine tasks (e.g. certain coordinations or flight data exchange).
Supervisor is a person who is operationally responsible for the management of an ATS unit during a shift.

Working Position Organization
The information in these articles is relevant to all controller positions.

Single Person Operations in ATC
Executive and Planner Controller
The Handover-Takeover Process (Operational ATC Positions)

Controller Training and Competency

Before a person starts to provide ATC service, they must be properly trained and qualified.

Controller Training
Controller Refresher Training
Minimum Hours in Position
English Language Proficiency Requirements

Tools
Surveillance
The surveillance tools greatly enhance the controllers' situational awareness and allow them to handle more traffic without compromising safety.

Primary Surveillance Radar (PSR)
Secondary Surveillance Radar (SSR)
Multilateration
Automated Dependent Surveillance-Broadcast (ADS-B)
Surface Movement Radar
A-SMGCS
Precision Approach Radar (PAR)

ATM Systems and Support Tools

The automated systems combine data from different sources thus further enhancing the controllers' situational awareness. This leads to a great increase of capacity (i.e. the ability to safely handle multiple flights).

Automation and ATM
Plots, Tracks and Labels
Correlation
Integrated Tower Working Position (ITWP)
Medium Term Conflict Detection (MTCD)
Tactical Controller Tool (TCT)
Probe (what-if)
Safety Nets
OLDI
Lost Track Tool

Procedures
ATC Clearances
Air traffic controllers issue clearances and instruction to aircraft in order to separate them and to create and maintain an expeditious traffic flow.

ATC Clearance
North Atlantic Operations - ATC Clearance
Immediate Тakeoff Clearances
Conditional Clearance

Separation
One of the most important tasks of air traffic controllers is to provide separation, i.e. make sure that there is enough spacing between aircraft so that there is no risk of collision.

Separation Standards
Own Separation
Strategic Lateral Offset
Composite Separation
Reduced Vertical Separation Minima (RVSM)

Conflict Detection and Solving
Prevention of collisions between aircraft is normally done by providing adequate separation. This is a two step process. First, the controller detects potential conflicting aircraft pairs. Then, appropriate measures are taken to resolve the conflicts.

Controller Detection of Manoeuvring Area Conflicts
Blind Spot – Inefficient conflict detection with closest aircraft
Conflict Detection with Adjacent Sectors
Conflict Detection
Conflict Solving

Basic Controller Techniques
This subsection contains information on the basic techniques used by controllers in order to achieve the objectives of air traffic control.

Identification
Basic Controller Techniques - Vectoring
Basic Controller Techniques - Speed Control
Basic Controller Techniques - Vertical Speed
Basic Controller Techniques - Level Change
Parallel Offset

Coordination
Coordination with neighbouring ATC sectors and units is an integral part of air traffic control.

ATC Unit Coordination
ATC Team Coordination
GND-TWR Coordination
Civil-Military Interaction in ATM
Release Procedure
Transfer of Communication
Transfer of Control
Approval Requests

Articles Related to ATFM
Air traffic flow management aims to adjust traffic demand with the available capacity.

ATM Sector Management
Methods to Describe Sector Capacity

Articles Related to ASM
The main objective of airspace management is to ensure optimal use of the available airspace.

Free Route Airspace (FRA)
Flexible Use of Airspace

Further Reading

UK CAA CAP717: Radar Control - Collision Avoidance Concepts





Categories


General









Further Reading
UK CAA CAP717: Radar Control - Collision Avoidance Concepts












Feedback