Handover/Takeover of Operational ATC Working Positions











  Handover/Takeover of Operational ATC Working Positions









Article Information

Category:



Request for Support Message







Content source:




 EUROCONTROL





 









Content control:




 EUROCONTROL





 















Synopsis
In 2004, a EUROCONTROL Safety Reminder Message (SRM) was released which provided advice concerning the handover/takeover process of operational ATC working positions. Since then, although progress has been made in many ANSPs, there are still problems in others that need to be addressed. Indeed, more recently, a European ANSP has detected incidents associated with a lack of transfer/assimilation of appropriate information during the handover process, leading to poor situational awareness of controllers taking over operational working positions.
Analysis
As the previous SRM on this topic said, “It has been acknowledged that the vast majority of handovers take place without any problems, and only a very small proportion are flawed. Therefore, the level of normal human reliability has been already reached and potential mitigations should be targeted at the other system elements procedures (checklists) and/or equipment”.
Information Requested
The purpose of this message is to collect details of the practical measures taken by controllers during the handover/takeover process to reduce the known risks in this area. Therefore, copies of any associated checklists, SOPs, techniques and good/best practices would be welcomed.
Further Reading

EUROCONTROL Safety Reminder Message - Handover/takeover of Operational Positions - 15 October 2004.
'Selected Safety Issues for Staffing ATC Operations'

Summary of Responses

Follow this link

Disclaimer
© European Organisation for Safety of Air Navigation (EUROCONTROL) May 2011. This alert is published by EUROCONTROL for information purposes. It may be copied in whole or in part, provided that EUROCONTROL is mentioned as the source and to the extent justified by the non-commercial use (not for sale). The information in this document may not be modified without prior written permission from EUROCONTROL. The use of the document is at the user’s sole risk and responsibility. EUROCONTROL expressly disclaim any and all warranties with respect to any content within the alert, express or implied.




Categories


Request for Support Message












Feedback