Privacy Statement










   Privacy Statement






Privacy statement on the protection of personal data
SKYbrary 
EUROCONTROL protects your personal data in accordance with the EUROCONTROL EUROCONTROL Regulation on Personal Data Protection adopted by its Member States and  published in 2008, and its Implementing Rules which were published in 2017.
1. What is SKYbrary?
The SKYbrary website offers an insight into aviation safety knowledge to a wide range of people interested in flight safety and air traffic management. It also links visitors to external sites, which are considered of interest to the aviation community.
2. Why do we collect, store and process data about you?
SKYbrary may collect and process your personal data namely for the following reasons:

subscription to SKYbrary and the SKYbrary newsletters;
contribution of content items (e.g. articles, presentations, video recordings) to SKYbrary, which contain personal information;
provision of feedback, comments and content improvement suggestions;
enabling registered users to access specific SKYbrary features; 
registration to safety events and conferences;
web site statistics.

The collection of your personal data when you subscribe as a registered user relies on your consent to provide it by filling the relevant form and accepting that you have read this privacy notice or by giving your explicit consent to publish a content item (e.g. a presentation or video recording) that contains personal data.
Content from other sources rely on the legal basis of the original data controller.
Contributions from EUROCONTROL staff are considered to be done in the performance of the tasks and functions of the Organisation.
3. What data do we collect, store and process via the SKYbrary website?
Some of the services offered on our website require the processing of your personal data.
The personal data we collect is divided into the following subsets:
a) Subscription data
When you become a registered user by subscribing to the SKYbrary newsletter, or by registering to SKYbrary, EUROCONTROL gathers in a dedicated database the personal data necessary to process your request. Furthermore, when launching newsletter campaigns we gather data to assess the impact of a campaign. Hence, depending on the nature of the subscription, the following data might be gathered and stored in EUROCONTROL's dedicated database:

name;
job title;
email;
company name;
country of residence;
log-in data
IP address.

b) Contributor's data
Content contribution to SKYbrary (e.g. an article, a presentation or video recording), whether submitted by you directly or via a third party (e.g. event organising committee), will be made freely accessible to the public in accordance with the SKYbrary Licence agreement and Code of conduct. Depending on the content type it may contain the following personal data:

personal photo or image;
name;
profession and/or post;
affiliation;
short bio data; 
views on or attitudes to particular topics or subjects.

When you submit to SKYbrary an inquiry, feedback, comments or other information relevant to the SKYbrary content or your subscription, EUROCONTROL gathers in a dedicated database the personal data necessary to process your input. Depending on the input subject, the following data might be gathered and stored in EUROCONTROL's dedicated database:

name;
email address;
log-in data;
submitted feedback, comments and/or view on a particular topic or subject. 

c) Tracking data
Tracking data generated by EUROCONTROL's email campaigns is kept and used in anonymised form solely for statistical purposes, i.e. to establish the usefulness of the SKYbrary email campaigns. Personal tracking data will not be used.
d) Cookies data
Cookies are short text files stored on a user’s device (such as a computer, tablet or phone) by a website, which could be used for the technical functioning of a website, for gathering statistics on the use of the website or for other purposes, such as to provide a user with a more personalised experience. On the SKYbrary website we use only web analytics cookies.
e) Control of cookies on this website
A banner is displayed on every page of the website, informing you of the use of cookies and giving you the possibility to opt-in or opt-out. If you choose to opt-in (and thus being tracked), you can always change your mind and opt-out.
f) Social media cookies
Cookies are not set by our display of social media buttons, in our website pages or from the use of embedded components from those services (e.g. Vimeo).
Each social media channel has their own policy on the way they process your personal data when you access their sites.
g) How to control cookies from your browser
Most browsers automatically accept cookies. You can prevent cookies from being stored on your computer or device by changing your browser settings.
h) Do not track preferences
Do not track is a function that allows visitors to opt out from being tracked by websites for any purpose including the use of analytics services, advertising networks and social platforms. Do not track options are available in a number of browsers including:
Firefox - Internet Explorer - Chrome - Safari – Opera
4. Who is your data disclosed to? Who has access to your data? 
Access to your personal data collected as part of the subscription and user feedback processes is provided to SKYbrary core team that includes EUROCONTROL staff and external contractors, who are responsible for the user registration process, content management, website use analysis and EUROCONTROL's email campaigns, as applicable. Such staff abide by statutory confidentiality requirements, and contractors by confidentiality agreements.
Access to your personal data collected as part of the content contribution and publication process (e.g. personal data contained in an article, a presentation or video recording) is provided to the public (SKYbrary user community) in accordance with the SKYbrary Licence agreement and Code of conduct.
5. How long is your data kept?
Your personal data will be kept in the SKYbrary users database until you unsubscribe as registered user or you request to the website administrator to delete your personal data or content contribution that contains your personal data.
6. What are your rights under the EUROCONTROL Data Protection Regulation
You have the right to access, rectify, complete and update your data:
a) using self-service interfaces (i.e. online tool function to edit your profile) and the update is immediate/option.
b) by contacting the website administrator. You have the right to object to the use of your personal data in some circumstances. You may also delete your personal information. You have the right to request additional information about the handling of your personal data by contacting the website administrator.
7. How can you withdraw consent you have given to SKYbrary?
You may withdraw your consent at any moment by contacting the website administrator or by unsubscribing directly via the SKYbrary highlight message. Once EUROCONTROL has received notification that you have withdrawn your consent, EUROCONTROL will no longer process your information for the purpose(s) you originally agreed to.
8. What do we do to avoid misuse or unauthorised access to personal data concerning you?
EUROCONTROL is committed to ensuring that your information is secure. In order to prevent unauthorised access or disclosure, EUROCONTROL has put in place suitable physical, electronic and managerial procedures to safeguard and secure the information collected online. Staff handling your data are bound by confidentiality obligations.
9. What safeguards do we apply when we transfer your data to third parties?
Your personal data is only given to a very limited set of contractors for the performance of their tasks (see section 4 above). Contracts with our contractors contain appropriate confidentiality obligations. 
10. Who can you contact if you have questions or want to make a complaint?
For any queries related to your personal data, please contact the website administrator who is the role responsible for the processing of the personal data concerning you.
Complaints can be addressed to EUROCONTROL’s Data Protection Officer.