Just Culture Repository



The SKYbrary Just Culture Repository and Knowledge Centre contains a comprehensive overview of both applicable law as well as registered commitments, policies and positions from states, stakeholders, authorities, the judiciary and other organisations; it is managed by a sufficiently independent and experienced entity. The Just Culture (JC) Repository contains clear and transparent commitments signed off by the owners/stakeholders and will be a living space with clear provisions on updating and reporting on relevant developments as well as managing the data and documentation.
The repository provides an insight on the status and progress of the application of Just Culture across both state and corporate levels. This is important for a realistic assessment what tasks lies ahead to attain a common application of Just Culture in Europe and beyond. It will also provide examples of reasonable and attainable objectives for states/organisations that currently do not yet have fully implemented a Just Culture.
Data and Knowledge is provided to Interested Parties without any restrictions or registrations constraints.
An overview of the repository contents is provided in the navigation block to the right.
Just Culture Definition
A Just Culture has been defined as a culture in which front line operators and others are not punished for actions, omissions or decisions taken by them that are commensurate with their experience and training, but where gross negligence, wilful violations and destructive acts are not tolerated.
Only a very small proportion of human actions that are unsafe are deliberate (e.g. criminal activity, substance abuse, use of controlled substances, reckless noncompliance, sabotage, etc.) and as such deserve sanctions of appropriate severity. A blanket amnesty on all unsafe acts would lack credibility in the eyes of employees and could be seen to oppose natural justice.
Read the lead article on Just Culture.
Further Reading
About Just Culture
Just Culture
Just Culture and Media
Just Culture Knowledge Centre





 













Just Culture Navigation



Main category page


Just Culture in Aviation


Just Culture in Healthcare


Just Culture in Maritime


Just Culture in Rail





Related resources




Human Error in Aviation and Legal Process
Safety and Justice Toolkit